<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en" prefix="bibo: http://purl.org/ontology/bibo/
 cc: http://creativecommons.org/ns#
 dcmitype: http://purl.org/dc/dcmitype/
 dcterms: http://purl.org/dc/terms/
 foaf: http://xmlns.com/foaf/0.1/
 nm: http://nomisma.org/id/
 owl:  http://www.w3.org/2002/07/owl#
 rdfs: http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema# 
 rdfa: http://www.w3.org/ns/rdfa#
 rdf:  http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#
 skos: http://www.w3.org/2004/02/skos/core#
 ">
 <head>
 
 <title>The Magician as a Literary Figure in Ancient Egyptian Texts</title>
  
 <link rel="schema.DC" href="http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/" />
 <link rel="schema.DCTERMS" href="http://purl.org/dc/terms/" />
 
 <meta name="DC.title" content="Tasting the Little Scroll: A Sensory Analysis of Divine Interaction in Revelation 10.8–10" /> 
 <meta name="DC.date" content="2020-01-00" />
 <meta name="DC.format" content="application/xhtml+xml" />
 <meta name="DC.creator" content="Meredith JC Warren" /> 
 <meta name="DC.language" content="en" /> 
 <meta name="DC.publisher" content="Institute for the Study of the Ancient World, New York University" />
 <meta name="DC.subject" content="" />
 <meta name="DC.subject" content="" />
 <meta name="DCTERMS.license" content="Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 Unported (CC-BY)" />
 <meta name="DCTERMS.bibliographicCitation" content="" />
 <meta name="DCTERMS.isPartOf" content="ISAW Papers" />
 <meta name="DCTERMS.identifier.DOI" content=""/>
	 
 <link rel="dcterms:isPartOf" href="http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/756047783" />
 <link rel="dcterms:isPartOf" href="urn:issn:2164-1471" />
 <link rel="dcterms:isPartOf" href="http://isaw.nyu.edu/publications/isaw-papers" />

<link rel="stylesheet" href="isaw-publications.css"/>

 </head>    
    
<body>

<article>

<header>
 <h2>ISAW Papers # (2020)</h2>
 
 <h1 rel="dcterms:title">Tasting the Little Scroll: A Sensory Analysis of Divine Interaction in <i>Revelation</i> 10.8–10</h1>
  
 <h2><span rel="dcterms:creator"><a rel="dcterms:identifier" href="" property="foaf:name">Meredith JC Warren</a></span>, University of Sheffield</h2>
 
 <p class="doi"><a rel="dcterms:identifier" href="">DOI Here (TK)</a></p>
 
 
 <p class="subjects"><em>Library of Congress Subjects:</em> <a rel="dcterms:subject" href="http://id.loc.gov/authorities/subjects/sh98003953">TK</a>; <a rel="dcterms:subject" href="http://id.loc.gov/authorities/subjects/sh98003953">TK</a>.</p>

</header>

<section id="section1">
<p class="textindent0">The following is a summary of the paper, which has been published 2017 as “Tasting the Little Scroll: A Sensory Analysis of Divine Interaction in Revelation 10.8–10.” <i>Journal for the Study of the New Testament</i> 40.1, 101–119, available open access under <a href="https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/0142064X17723489">https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/0142064X17723489</a> (Warren 2017a). The larger project out of which this material was taken has also now been published (2019) as a monograph: <i>Food and Transformation in Ancient Mediterranean Literature</i>. Writings from the Greco-Roman World Supplement Series. Atlanta.<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-1" href="#footnote-1">1</a></sup></p>

<p class="margintop15em textindent0">One significant way that John of Patmos experiences God’s revelation and transmits it to others is through ingesting the scroll in <i>Rev</i>. 10.8–10. Given the prevalence of sensory imagery in <i>Revelation</i>, the gustatory descriptors in <i>Rev</i>. 10.8–10 should be understood as pointing to a specific meaning. John uses the scroll, its consumption, and its subsequent flavours to communicate the legitimacy of his revelatory experiences, and indeed, the authority of the <i>Book of Revelation</i> as a whole. A sensory analysis of <i>Rev</i>. 10.8–10 highlights the role of taste in the transmission of divine knowledge as well as the specific ramifications of ingesting sweet- and bitter-tasting substances.</p>

<p>Using sensory analysis, I propose that the scroll’s ingestion represents a shared understanding, across religious boundaries, of how the consumption of otherworldly food in the narrative grants access to the divine realm. This literary mechanism is integral to many descriptions of how divine knowledge is transmitted to mortals. Certain qualities of the sense of taste, namely its intimacy when compared to the shared senses of sight or hearing, suggest that participants in this kind of eating experience God in the most intimate way: John is granted privileged access to God’s knowledge when he consumes the little scroll, and as a result is able to translate his taste experience into a textual representation of visions, accessibly to a wider community.<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-2" href="#footnote-2">2</a></sup></p>

<p>This short episode in <i>Revelation</i> 10.8–10 has received less scholarly attention than many other aspects of this complex apocalypse. Comparing <i>Revelation</i> with two texts in which similar ingestion takes place, I argue that <i>Rev.</i> 10.8–10 makes use of a common literary trope I call hierophagy – the eating of otherworldly things – in which the eater undergoes a change that renders him/her uniquely capable of understanding divine knowledge as a result of the eating. Hierophagy, I suggest, is a tool used by ancient authors to bring about contact between mortal and divine realms: characters within narratives consume some other-worldly item and are granted access to divine knowledge, abilities, and even heaven itself.<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-3" href="#footnote-3">3</a></sup> While some examples of the trope involve items normally considered edible,<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-4" href="#footnote-4">4</a></sup> the <i>Book of Revelation</i> portrays its protagonist ingesting a scroll. <i>Revelation</i>’s use of a non-food item highlights that it is the act of ingesting the otherworldly item, and not the nature of the item itself, that is at the heart of hierophagy.</p>

<p>In the published article, I analyze two comparative examples to illuminate the process of hierophagy in <i>Revelation</i>: <i>Ezekiel</i> 2.8–3.4 and <i>4</i> <i>Ezra</i> 14.38–41. In <i>Ezekiel</i>, a text which <i>Revelation</i> freely invokes (Koester 2014: 482; Beale 1999: 550–553; Aune 1997: 558; Collins 1976: 20), the prophet is also handed a scroll which tastes merely sweet, and not bitter. Ezekiel gains heavenly knowledge and the ability to prophesy by eating the scroll. In 4 <i>Ezra</i>, a text from around the time of <i>Revelation</i>’s composition, the protagonist likewise ingests food from heaven, this time a cup full of liquid. Ezra is granted divine understanding and is later taken up into heaven (Warren 2015). On the basis of these texts, we can discern a pattern that helps in understanding <i>Revelation</i>’s scroll scene. By consuming the scroll, John of Patmos gains new abilities (to prophesy again) and new knowledge (the contents of that prophecy). The core event of the hierophagic eating in <i>Revelation</i> can be outlined as follows: (1) A heavenly being offers (2) something heavenly (3) for a mortal (4) to eat (5), which brings about the internalization of divine revelation (6), which is later made accessible to non-eaters in a different form.</p>

<p>I employ two intersecting approaches in reading <i>Revelation</i> 10. The first is reading <i>Apocalypse</i> through the lens of ingestion. This involves taking into account not only the physical aspects of eating but also how eating functions as metaphor. Ingestion deconstructs the perceived opposition between what is outside the body and what is inside. As soon as a foreign item is brought into the body, the item is transformed into part of the eater (Kilgour 1990). This function of ingestion is at play in <i>Revelation</i>, as the boundary between divine realms and mortal realms is softened through John’s ingestion of the scroll.</p>

<p>The second approach is sensory analysis. In the study of ancient religions, sensory analysis has yet to attain widespread use, despite several excellent recent publications (Harvey 2006; Green 2011; Rudolph 2017); it has become an increasingly prevalent in many other fields, especially social sciences (Howes 2003). A literary analysis of an ancient text with a view to highlighting the non-visual senses brings out the assumed cultural meanings with which taste is imbued.</p>

<p>Because ingestion and taste are both employed in <i>Revelation</i>’s hierophagic event, it is possible to draw out implications for both the metaphorical use of taste and the boundary-transgressing social function of ingestion (Korsmeyer 2002: 187; Weichart/van Eeuwijk 2007: 3; Douglas 1972; Farb/Armelagos 1980: 4; Kilgour 1990). The act of participating in a common taste experience, even across time and space, establishes bonds between those who participate in the experience (Smith 2003: 14).<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-5" href="#footnote-5">5</a></sup> The fact that the item that John consumes is heavenly implies that the divine realm is transformed from external to internal. John is associated with heaven even though no divine being shares his taste experience in this particular example.</p>

<p>The sweet and bitter flavours also have implications for our understanding <i>Revelation</i>’s hierophagic event. John’s taste experience is not uniform in its flavour: whereas <i>Ezekiel</i>’s scroll is only sweet, the scroll in <i>Revelation</i> turns bitter once it has been internalised, forcing the eater to reinterpret his taste experience. The sweet and bitter flavours are not merely metaphorical, corresponding to salvation and suffering, but further communicate the efficacy of John’s prophetic message. Medical texts from antiquity suggest that medicines that have a bitter taste are considered the most effective (Totelin 2017), and non-medical epistles confirm that this was also an understanding held by those outside the medical community.<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-6" href="#footnote-6">6</a></sup></p>

<p><i>Revelation</i> uses hierophagy to communicate John’s privileged, intimate access to the divine realm. His tasting of the scroll confirms the divine origins of the message he communicates throughout the rest of <i>Revelation</i>. The pattern of hierophagy, of which the scroll event of <i>Rev</i>. 10.8–10 is one example, is found across a variety of ancient texts and represents a common way of expressing divine-human communication. The trope of hierophagy, when recognised, illuminates how people in antiquity envisioned their relationship to the divine realm, and specifically highlights how taste and ingestion function in a narrative context to enable divine-mortal interaction. It likewise emphasises the importance of a sensory analysis to uncover more about the shared worldview of ancient Mediterranean communities, including Jews and Christians.</p>
</section>

<section id="works_cited">
<h2>Works Cited</h2>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Aune, David. 1997. <i>Revelation 6–16</i>.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Beale, Gregory K. 1999. <i>The Book of Revelation</i>. Grand Rapids.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Collins, Adela Yarbro. 1976. <i>The Combat Myth in the Book of Revelation</i>. Missoula.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Douglas, Mary. 1972. “Deciphering a Meal.” <i>Daedalus </i>101.1: 61–81.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Farb, Peter/Armelagos, George. 1980. <i>Consuming Passions: The Anthropology of Eating</i>. Boston.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Green, Deborah A. 2011. <i>The Aroma of Righteousness: Scent and Seduction in Rabbinic Life and Literature</i>. University Park, PA.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Harvey, Susan A. 2006. <i>Scenting Salvation: Ancient Christianity and the Olfactory Imagination</i>. Berkeley.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Howes, David. 2003. <i>Sensual Relations: Engaging the Senses in Culture and Social Theory. </i>Ann Arbor.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Kilgour, Maggie. 1990. <i>From Communion to Cannibalism</i>. Princeton.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Koester, Craig R. 2014. <i>Revelation: A New Translation with Introduction and Commentary. </i>Anchor Bible. New Haven.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Korsmeyer, Carolyn. 2002. <i>Making Sense of Taste: Food and Philosophy</i>. Ithaca, USA.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Lalonde, Marc P. 1992. “Deciphering a Meal Again, Or the Anthropology of Taste.” <i>Social Science Information </i>31.1: 69–86.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Rudolph, Kelli C. (ed.) 2017.<i> Taste and the Ancient Senses</i>. The Senses in Antiquity. London.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Smith, Dennis E. 2003. <i>From Symposium to Eucharist: The Banquet in the Early Christian World</i>. Minneapolis.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Totelin, Laurence. 2017. “Tastes in Botany, Medicine and Science in Antiquity: Bitter Herbs and Sweet Honey.” In Rudolph, Kelli C. (ed.). <i>Taste and the Ancient Senses</i>. London, 60–71.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Warren, Meredith J. C. 2015. “My Heart Poured Forth Understanding: <i>4 Ezra</i>’s Fiery Cup as Hierophagic Consumption.” <i>Studies in Religion</i> 44.2: 320–333.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Warren, Meredith J. C. 2017a. “Tasting the little scroll: a sensory analysis of divine interaction in Revelation 10:8–10.” <i>Journal for the Study of the New Testament</i> 40.1: 101–119.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Weichart, Gabriele/van Eeuwijk, Piet. 2007. “Preface.” <i>Anthropology of Food</i>, S3, http://aof.revues.org/1742 (accessed 12 September 2017).</span></p>

</section>

<section id="futher_reading">
<h2>Further Reading</h2>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Baynes, Leslie. 2010. “Revelation 5:1 and 10:2a, 8–10 in the Earliest Greek tradition: A Response to Richard Bauckham.” <i>Journal of Biblical Literature</i> 129: 801–816.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Baynes, Leslie. 2014. <i>The Heavenly Book Motif in Judeo-Christian Apocalypses 200 B.C.E.–200 C.E</i>. Leiden.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Muir, Steven/Tappenden, Frederick S. 2017. “Edible Media – Food and Learning in the Ancient World.” <i>Lexington Theological Quarterly</i> 47.3–4: 123–147.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Reynolds, Benjamin E. 2013. “The Otherworldly Mediators in 4 Ezra and 2 Baruch: A Comparison with Angelic Mediators in Ascent Apocalypses and in Daniel, Ezekiel, and Zechariah.” In: Henze, Matthias/Boccaccini, Gabriele (eds.).<i> Fourth Ezra and Second Baruch: Reconstruction after the Fall</i>. Leiden. 175–193. </span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Sulzbach, Carla. 2010. “When Going on a Heavenly Journey, Travel Light and Dress Appropriately.” <i>JSP</i> 19: 163–193. </span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Smith, Christopher R. 1994. “The Structure of the Book of Revelation in Light of Apocalyptic Literary Conventions.” <i>Novum Testamentum</i> 36.4: 373–393.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Warren, Meredith J. C. 2017b. “Tastes from Beyond: Persephone’s Pomegranate and Otherworldly Consumption in Antiquity.” In Rudolph, Kelli C. (ed.), <i>Taste and the Ancient Senses</i>. London, 104–119.</span></p>

</section>

<section id="footnotes">
<h2>Notes</h2>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-1"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-1">1</a></sup> This work was supported by the Fonds de Recherche du Québec – Société et Culture (grant number 174380).</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-2"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-2">2</a></sup> On consumption of scrolls, see also the contribution of Edward Love &lt;&lt;link&gt;&gt;.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-3"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-3">3</a></sup> Certain patterns emerge in terms of what kinds of things are consumed, but the item is not always food. I merely use the word “food” here as a general term indicating that something is ingested, whether or not that item is liquid or solid, or even edible in an ordinary context.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-4"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-4">4</a></sup> Some Greco-Roman texts do present the hierophagic item as food: Perpetua consumes cheese to receive the divinely-given knowledge of her impending death in <i>The Martyrdom of Perpetua and Felicitas</i> 4.10; Persephone eats pomegranate in Ovid’s <i>Metamorphosis</i> 5.534–37, which prevents her from fully returning from the underworld; and Aseneth consumes honeycomb in <i>Joseph and Aseneth</i> 16.15–16, a food which not only gives her divine knowledge, but also transforms her appearance. The food item in 4 <i>Ezra</i> 14.38 might be recognizable but for one factor: the cup is full of liquid, making it identifiable as something to ingest, but it has the appearance of fire, marking it as extraordinary. The roses that Lucius-as-donkey eats in the <i>Metamorphoses</i> of Apuleius 11.13 are also a borderline example, since roses were used in ancient Mediterranean cuisine, but not in the raw format eaten by Lucius.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-5"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-5">5</a></sup> It is not just sharing food at the same table which produces this community, but also sharing tastes with a community even at a great distance (Lalonde 1992).</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-6"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-6">6</a></sup> It is worth noting that the leaves from the Tree of Life in <i>Rev.</i> 22.2 are to be used for healing, although whether the abundant fruit the tree produces is to be consumed is unclear.</p>

</section>

<footer>
<p class="editorial-note"><a rel="dcterms:isPartOf" href="http://isaw.nyu.edu/publications/isaw-papers"><i>ISAW Papers</i></a> (ISSN 2164-1471) is a publication of the <a rel="dcterms:publisher" property="dcterms:publisher" href="http://isaw.nyu.edu">Institute for the Study of the Ancient World</a>, <a href="http://nyu.edu/">New York University</a>. This chapter was anonymously reviewed prior to publication.</p>
	
<p class="copyright" style="margin-top:1em;text-align:center;color:gray">©2020 <span rel="cc:attributionName">Meredith JC Warren</span>. Distributed under the terms of the <a rel="cc:license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/" style="color:gray">Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International</a> license.</p>
</footer>

</article>
</body>
</html>