<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>

<!DOCTYPE html>

<html lang="en" prefix="bibo:http://purl.org/ontology/bibo/ cc:http://creativecommons.org/ns# dcmitype:http://purl.org/dc/dcmitype/ dcterms:http://purl.org/dc/terms/ foaf:http://xmlns.com/foaf/0.1/ nm:http://nomisma.org/id/ owl:http://www.w3.org/2002/07/owl# rdfs:http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema# rdfa:http://www.w3.org/ns/rdfa# rdf:http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns# skos:http://www.w3.org/2004/02/skos/core#" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"> 
<head>
<title>Incubation in Demotic Literature</title>
<link href="http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/" rel="schema.DC"/>
<link href="http://purl.org/dc/terms/" rel="schema.DCTERMS"/>
<meta content="Incubation in Demotic Literature" name="DC.title"/>
<meta content="2020-00-00" name="DC.date"/>
<meta content="application/xhtml+xml" name="DC.format"/>
<meta content="Gil H. Renberg" name="DC.creator"/>
<meta content="en" name="DC.language"/>
<meta content="Among the ritual activities to be found in Demotic literature is incubation, which is attested in both well-known works and obscure ones, but there has never been a study of what such sources can reveal – as well as the questions they raise – regarding the practice. This paper, part of a larger project on incubation in the ancient world, will survey all of the Demotic passages that clearly or potentially refer to incubation, as well as certain pertinent passages in Greek literature, and put them in the context of what is known of incubation at Egyptian sanctuaries during the Greco-Roman period. [This work is now published as part of the monograph Where Dreams May Come: Incubation Sanctuaries in the Greco-Roman World, 2 vols. (Religions in the Graeco-Roman World 184; Leiden &amp; Boston, 2017), which won the Goodwin Award of the Society for Classical Studies in 2019]." name="DC.abstract"/>
<meta content="Institute for the Study of the Ancient World, New York University" name="DC.publisher"/>
<meta content="Incubation (Religion)" name="DC.subject"/>
<meta content="Egyptian literature" name="DC.subject"/>
<meta content="Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 Unported (CC-BY)" name="DCTERMS.license"/>
<meta content="Gil H. Renberg. 2020. Incubation in Demotic Literature. ISAW Papers 18.8." name="DCTERMS.bibliographicCitation"/>
<meta content="ISAW Papers" name="DCTERMS.isPartOf"/>
<meta content="2333.1/4f4qrrdk" name="DCTERMS.identifier.DOI"/>
<link href="http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/756047783" rel="dcterms:isPartOf"/> 
<link href="urn:issn:2164-1471" rel="dcterms:isPartOf"/> 
<link href="http://isaw.nyu.edu/publications/isaw-papers" rel="dcterms:isPartOf"/>

 <link rel="stylesheet" href="isaw-publications.css"/>

</head>

<body>

<article>

<header>


<h2>ISAW Papers 18.8 (2020)</h2>
<h1 rel="dcterms:title">Incubation in Demotic Literature</h1>
<h2><span rel="dcterms:creator"><a href="http://viaf.org/viaf/26758827" property="foaf:name" rel="dcterms:identifier">Gil H. Renberg</a></span>, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor</h2>

<p class="textindent0 margintop15em" style="margin-left:2em;margin-right:2em">In Franziska Naether, ed. 2020. <a href="http://hdl.handle.net/2333.1/5dv41zmf"><i>Cult Practices in Ancient Literatures: Egyptian, Near Eastern and Graeco-Roman Narratives in a Cross-Cultural Perspective. Proceedings of a Workshop at the Institute for the Study of the Ancient World, New York, May 16-17, 2016.</i> ISAW Papers 18</a>.</p>

<p class="doi">URI: <a href="http://hdl.handle.net/2333.1/4f4qrrdk" rel="dcterms:identifier">http://hdl.handle.net/2333.1/4f4qrrdk</a></p>

<p class="subjects"><em>Library of Congress Subjects:</em> <a href="http://id.loc.gov/authorities/subjects/sh85064806" rel="dcterms:subject">Incubation (Religion)</a>; <a href="http://id.loc.gov/authorities/subjects/sh85041351" rel="dcterms:subject">Egyptian literature</a>.</p>
</header>

<main>

<p id="p1" class="textindent0">Despite the occasional appearance of studies of dreams in ancient Egypt, there has not been one devoted exclusively to the cult practices of divinatory and therapeutic incubation there, and most of the studies that do touch upon incubation pre-date the publication of several Demotic tales from the Tebtunis Temple Library that provide new insights. This gap in the scholarship has now been addressed in my 2017 book <i>Where Dreams May Come: Incubation Sanctuaries in the Greco-Roman World</i>, 2 vols. Religions in the Graeco-Roman World 184. Leiden/Boston, which makes full use of the documentary and literary sources from Egypt to establish what can be known regarding the religious phenomenon of seeking oracular or curative dreams from gods at their sanctuaries (a practice widespread among the Greeks beginning in Classical times, if not Archaic). Demotic works of fiction represent an irreplaceable source of information, as I discussed at the “Cult Practices in Ancient Literatures” workshop, but since the conference paper was derived from the book (especially pp. 74–100), here I provide only a brief summary of the topic rather than a full-length article.</p>

<p id="p2">Dreams and dream accounts represent a frequent element of Demotic literature, appearing in more than half of the longer surviving examples. While all such passages are of interest, only the ones stating (or likely to have stated) that a dream had been received at a temple are relevant, insofar as they add to our understanding of this ritual and its role in Egyptian religion. A full appreciation of the issues involved in employing Demotic tales as evidence for incubation can be achieved by using an approach common among journalists: asking the questions known as the “Five W’s (and one H) of journalism,” <i>i.e.</i> Who? What? When? Where? Why? and How?</p>

 <ul>
<li><b>What and Why?</b> Incubation usually was practiced in order to obtain a dream-oracle about some future matter or medical issue, with most of the gods consulted specializing in either prophecy or healing, though in certain cases both. In addition, a subcategory of therapeutic incubation, which may be termed “fertility incubation,” was practiced by couples who had been unable to have children and were seeking advice from a god known for having a medical specialty. Some of the best evidence for fertility incubation among the Egyptians is to be found in literature: Mehwesekhet receiving a dream from Ptah or Imhotep in <i>Setna II</i>; a passage in the unpublished Demotic tale <i>Nakhthorshen</i> (<i>P. Carlsberg</i> 400); and possibly two problematic passages in <i>Doomed Prodigy Son</i> (<i>P. Petese Tebt.</i> A) and <i>King Wenamun and the Kingdom of Lihyan</i>. The latter also features an episode in which the king engages in divinatory incubation at Miysis’s temple in Leontopolis in order to receive counsel regarding a military expedition; however, therapeutic incubation is only represented unambiguously not in a Demotic tale, but in the famous Greek narrative known as the <i>Imouthes Aretalogy</i> of <i>P. Oxy.</i> 11, 1381, which has obvious Egyptian literary influences.</li>
<br/>
<li><b>Where?</b> In contrast to dream-divination that one could perform at home – evidence for which is found in the Greek and Demotic magical papyri, among other places – incubation had to be performed at a temple, and one of the important questions regarding the practice in Egypt is which temples were employed in this manner. In addition to Greek literary and documentary sources and Demotic documentary sources that have identified such disparate sites as the Canopus Sarapieion, sacred animal complexes at Saqqâra, and Amenhotep’s rock-cut sanctuary at Deir el-Bahari, the Demotic tales – though fictional – have helped to identify other likely sites, most notably the temple of Miysis mentioned above and Thoth’s temple at Hermoupolis Magna (in <i>Setna II</i>, but also the ritual text known as the <i>Book of Thoth</i>). (Another text, the <i>Prophecy of Petesis</i>/<i>Dream of Nektanebos</i>, might reveal incubation at Isis’s temple in Memphis, though the setting at which the pharaoh received his dream may have been Saqqâra instead.) The Demotic tales also provide valuable information regarding a related issue: where specifically within a temple-complex would worshipers have engaged in incubation? Whereas at Greek sanctuaries associated with the practice there were normally stoas or other buildings functioning as dormitories (and there was even a terminology specifically applied to such structures, i.e., ἐγκοιμητήριον/κοιμητήριον), this was not true of Egypt, where varied Demotic terminology points to different areas, such as a “wrapping room” or “embalming room” (<i>ššt</i>) in <i>Wenamun</i>, and a small shrine (<i>qnḥȝ(.t)</i>) associated with Apis bull catacombs in a school text about a pharaoh sleeping inside (<i>T. Strasbourg, Bibl. Nat. D</i> 1994, now edited as Vleeming, <i>Short Texts</i> III 2099). There is also an unspecified “place of dreaming” (<i>s.t rswy</i>) mentioned in the <i>Book of Thoth</i>.</li>
<br/>
<li><b>How?</b> In contrast to the practice of incubation in the Greek-speaking lands beyond Egypt, which is documented in great detail, quite little is known regarding the rituals and other steps associated with incubation in Egypt; but some of what we do know is attested in Demotic literary sources. Most notably, three tales (including <i>Wenamun</i>) specify the use of burnt offerings (<i>gll</i>) and libations (<i>wtn</i>), confirming what we might have suspected in any case. One would also expect prayers to be essential to the process, and while the best evidence for this comes from the archive of Ḥor of Sebennytos (with the magical papyri serving as likely indirect evidence), a brief prayer is to be found in <i>Setna II</i>, with the “magician” (<i>ẖr-tb</i>) Horus-son-of-Paneshe, saying “Turn your face to me, my lord Thoth!” (<i>my·w (sic) ḥr=k r ḥr-y pȝy=y nb Ḏḥw.ty</i>). While offerings, libations, and prayers were steps to be taken before receiving a god-sent dream, after one had successfully done so, it was sometimes necessary to receive an expert’s analysis of the dream’s meaning – as is indicated by several documentary sources, and further shown by an unpublished tale about Necho I recounting to his court magician a dream that quite possibly was received at a temple of Horus (<i>P. Carlsberg</i> 57 + 465), and Djoser doing the same in the unpublished <i>Life of Imhotep</i> (<i>P. Carlsberg</i> 85).</li>
<br/>
<li><b>When?</b> Among the most important questions pertaining to incubation in Egypt are when the practice began and whether it was a phenomenon native to Egypt or developed only under the influence of the Greek population living there – and important evidence is to be found both in Demotic literature and the <i>Dream of Nektanebos</i>, the Greek translation of a Demotic original (see <a href="http://hdl.handle.net/2333.1/866t1rxv">Matthey</a>’s contribution). This work, thought to have been written during the Persian occupation after Nektanebo II was driven from power in 342 <span style="font-variant: small-caps;">bce</span>, would be among the earliest sources for incubation in Egypt and proof that it was already being practiced – at least by royalty – before Ptolemaic times. The tale known as <i>Doomed Prodigy Son</i> appears to have told of a prophet who wished for a child engaging in incubation, and since the earliest fragment of this work is from the fourth century <span style="font-variant: small-caps;">bce</span> or earlier, this likewise could show that incubation in Egypt predated the Ptolemies. While clear evidence for the concept of incubation being known in early Ptolemaic times is to be found in the student exercise about a pharaoh at Saqqâra’s Apis bull catacombs, more tenuous and tentative evidence for the practice’s date is represented by another Demotic text about a pharaoh. Entitled the <i>Blinding of the Pharaoh</i> (<i>P. Petese Tebt.</i> C), this work is preserved on a papyrus dating ca. 100 <span style="font-variant: small-caps;">ce</span>; but since a version of this story was recounted by Herodotus roughly five centuries earlier, it obviously had much older roots (Hdt. 2.111). Unfortunately, while the Demotic version includes a pharaoh engaging in incubation, Herodotus only refers to his receiving an oracle, without specifying the medium, raising the opposing possibilities that incubation either was not an original element of the story or that it was but Herodotus either was unaware of the oracle’s having been a dream-oracle or opted against including this detail. Thus incubation may have been practiced in Egypt in Herodotus’s day, but he attests only to the antiquity of the story, not the practice.</li>
<br/>
<li><b>Who?</b> All of the examples of incubation (or possible examples) discussed above involved either a royal figure or a “magician” or prophet, and this is potentially significant because another important question about incubation in Egypt concerns who would engage in the practice: by Ptolemaic and Roman times anyone could do so, but it is unknown whether this was always the case, or whether originally only elite individuals (<i>i.e.</i>, members of the royal family or priestly community) would do so, before an eventual democratization (on this phenomenon, see also the contributions of <a href="http://hdl.handle.net/2333.1/cz8w9sdx">Roblee</a> and <a href="http://hdl.handle.net/2333.1/r4xgxq10">Warren</a>). Demotic literature, however, cannot be used to settle the issue either way, since its general focus on kings and priests – and, in turn, its exclusion of ordinary Egyptians – makes it a biased source. Thus, it is noteworthy that there is only one tale that might include an ordinary individual engaging in incubation, the figure known as “the Hagrite” (perhaps a courier) who appears in <i>King Wenamun</i>; but, since the passage is too fragmentary for it to be certain that he did indeed seek a dream-oracle in this manner it is at best tantalizing evidence for incubation possibly having been a divinatory ritual available to any worshiper long before the Ptolemaic Period.</li>

</ul>

<p id="p3">Overall, then, the Demotic tales (and related Greek works) provide a rich and multifaceted body of evidence for the history and role of incubation – particularly divinatory and fertility incubation – in Egyptian religion, and one that must be studied in detail for a proper appreciation of this phenomenon.</p>

<h2>Acknowledgments:</h2>
<p id="p4" class="textindent0">I would like to thank the audience and participants of the “Cult Practices in Ancient Literatures” workshop for their feedback on my paper, and Franziska Naether both for organizing the event and helping me in numerous ways to gain a greater understanding of Egyptian literature and religion as I worked on the book from which this talk was drawn. While several other people deserve to be acknowledged for this as well – and indeed they have been, in that work’s introduction – I must single out for additional thanks Kim Ryholt, who has provided valuable information regarding unpublished Demotic literary texts that he or colleagues are or were editing, and who shared his thoughts on a number of issues pertaining to dreams in Demotic literature.</p>
</main>

<footer>
<p class="editorial-note"><a href="http://isaw.nyu.edu/publications/isaw-papers" rel="dcterms:isPartOf"><i>ISAW Papers</i></a> (ISSN 2164-1471) is a publication of the <a href="http://isaw.nyu.edu" property="dcterms:publisher" rel="dcterms:publisher">Institute for the Study of the Ancient World</a>, <a href="http://nyu.edu/">New York University</a>. This article was anonymously reviewed prior to publication.</p>

<p class="copyright" style="margin-top:1em;text-align:center;color:gray">©2020 <span rel="cc:attributionName">Gil H. Renberg</span>. Distributed under the terms of the <a href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/" rel="cc:license">Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International</a> license.</p>
</footer>

</article>

</body>
</html>