<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">

<!--

<style type="text/css">
	
	.T1 { font-family:IFAO-Grec Unicode; }
	.T10 { font-family:IFAO-Grec Unicode; font-size:10pt; }
	.T11 { font-family:IFAO-Grec Unicode; font-size:10pt; font-style:italic; }
	.T12 { font-family:IFAO-Grec Unicode; font-size:10pt; }
	.T13 { font-family:IFAO-Grec Unicode; font-weight:bold; }
	.T14 { font-family:IFAO-Grec Unicode; }
	.T17 { font-style:italic; }
	.T18 { font-style:italic; }
	.T2 { font-family:IFAO-Grec Unicode; }
	.T20 { color:#000000; }
	.T21 { color:#000000; font-family:IFAO-Grec Unicode; }
	.T22 { color:#000000; font-family:IFAO-Grec Unicode; font-style:italic; }
	.T23 { color:#000000; font-family:IFAO-Grec Unicode; }
	.T24 { color:#000000; font-family:IFAO-Grec Unicode; font-style:italic; }
	.T25 { color:#000000; font-family:IFAO-Grec Unicode; }
	.T26 { color:#000000; font-family:IFAO-Grec Unicode; }
	.T27 { color:#000000; font-style:italic; }
	.T28 { color:#000000; vertical-align:sub; font-size:58%;font-family:IFAO-Grec Unicode; }
	.T29 { color:#000000; vertical-align:super; font-size:58%;font-family:IFAO-Grec Unicode; }
	.T3 { font-family:IFAO-Grec Unicode; font-style:italic; }
	.T32 { color:#ff0000; font-family:IFAO-Grec Unicode; }
	.T34 { vertical-align:super; font-size:58%;font-family:IFAO-Grec Unicode; }
	.T35 { vertical-align:super; font-size:58%;font-family:IFAO-Grec Unicode; }
	.T36 { vertical-align:super; font-size:58%;font-family:IFAO-Grec Unicode; font-size:10pt; }
	.T37 { vertical-align:super; font-size:58%;}
	.T38 { color:#0000ff; font-family:IFAO-Grec Unicode; }
	.T39 { vertical-align:sub; font-size:58%;font-family:IFAO-Grec Unicode; }
	.T4 { font-family:IFAO-Grec Unicode; font-style:italic; font-weight:bold; }
	.T5 { font-family:IFAO-Grec Unicode; font-weight:bold; }
	.T6 { font-family:IFAO-Grec Unicode; font-style:italic; }
	.T7 { font-family:IFAO-Grec Unicode; }
	.T8 { font-family:IFAO-Grec Unicode; font-size:10pt; }
	.T9 { font-family:IFAO-Grec Unicode; font-size:10pt; }

	ODF styles with no properties representable as CSS
	.Table1.1 .Table1.17 .Table1.2 .T16 .hi1  { }
	</style></head>
-->
<body>

<section id="commentaryiii">	
<h1>Part III: Astrological Commentary</h1>

<p class="textindent0">This part of our commentary consists of four sections. First, the kinds of astrological data represented in our horoscope will be given. Secondly, a tally will be made of all horoscopes in the extant corpus that include these data. Thirdly, examples of elaborate horoscopes incorporating a variety of data will be compared with our horoscope. Finally, their astrological meaning and context will be examined.</p>

<h2>Astrological Techniques in P.Berl. 9825</h2>

<p>The astrological significance of this papyrus can scarcely be overstated. It now joins other elaborate (sometimes called ‘deluxe’)<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-1" href="#footnote-commiii-1">1</a></sup> papyri in the extant corpus that apply a number of additional kinds of data (henceforth referred to as "technical data") to the basic horoscopic positions given for the nativity (that is, the zodiacal longitudes – which may include degrees and minutes of the sign – of the planets and luminaries, the Ascendant, and sometimes the Midheaven and other cardines). The information given in the papyrus consists of the following:</p>

<ul>
 <li>For the planets, luminaries, and lunar nodes<br/>
     (due to damage, the papyrus lacks information relating to the Sun)
    <ol>
     <li>Zodiacal longitude</li>
     <li>Dignities<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-2" href="#footnote-commiii-2">2</a></sup> (in order of listing): house, terms, triplicity, exaltation/depression</li>
     <li><i>Monomoiria</i></li>
     <li>Dodekatemorion</li>
     <li>Latitude</li>
     <li>Co-rising (<i>paranatellonta</i>) with fixed stars</li>
     <li>Fixed star’s "step" in magnitude</li>
    </ol>
   </li>
 </ul>

<ul>
 <li>For the cardines: (Ascendant, Midheaven, Setting [Descendant], Lower Midheaven)
  <ol>
   <li>Zodiacal longitude (degrees and minutes)</li>
   <li>Dignities: house, terms</li>
  </ol>
 </li>
</ul>

<ul>
 <li>For the Lots: Fortune, Daimon, Eros, Necessity, Courage, Victory, Nemesis
   <ol>
    <li>Zodiacal longitude</li>
    <li>Dignities: house, terms</li>
   </ol>
 </li>
</ul>

<ul>
 <li>For the Moon only
  <ol>
   <li>“Latitude” (apparently an error for longitude of apogee); its house</li>
   <li>Mean longitude; longitude’s house</li>
  </ol>
 </li>
</ul>

<ul>
 <li>Prenatal full Moon
  <ol>
   <li>Date of prenatal syzygy</li>
   <li>Zodiacal longitude</li>
   <li>Dignities: house, terms, triplicity</li>
   <li><i>Monomoiria</i></li>
   <li>Dodekatemorion
    <ul>
      <li>Presiding planet</li>
      <li>Managing planet</li>
      <li>Master of the nativity</li>
    </ul>
    </li>
  </ol>
  </li>
</ul>

<p>The wealth of information provided by the horoscope is almost unparalleled in the extant corpus of original documentary and literary horoscopes. At present, there are 446 extant horoscopic texts (including our horoscope) surviving from antiquity, as catalogued by Stephan Heilen and including not only Greek (345) and Latin (8) charts but those in Akkadian (30), Demotic Egyptian (51), Coptic (1), Persian (2), Arabic (2, plus 7 unpublished) and Jewish (1).<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-3" href="#footnote-commiii-3">3</a></sup> Most of these extant horoscopes give only the luminary and planetary positions, the Ascendant, and occasionally the Midheaven, often only by sign, though many include zodiacal longitudes in degrees or degrees and minutes.<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-4" href="#footnote-commiii-4">4</a></sup> Some include a number of additional technical data (astronomical, astrological, or both) to be used in chart interpretation, in addition to basic information.</p>

<h2>Frequency of Additional Technical Data in Extant Horoscopes</h2>

<p>To see how frequently the varieties of technical data given in our horoscope are included in the corpus of extant horoscopes as a whole, we have made a tally of those specifically represented in P.Berl. 9825, namely: lots, latitudes, fixed stars, the Moon’s nodes, <i>monomoiriai</i>, <i>dodekatemoria</i>, pre-natal syzygy (new Moon or full Moon), planets presiding/managing, and ‘house-master’ (<i>oikodespotes</i>).<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-5" href="#footnote-commiii-5">5</a></sup> Table 6 inventories horoscopes in the currently known corpus that contain technical data, concentrating on those in Greek dated up to the end of late antiquity,<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-6" href="#footnote-commiii-6">6</a></sup> but excludes our present horoscope in the tally.</p>

<p>Table 6. Technical Data in Ancient Horoscopes in Order of Frequency.</p>

<p>As the above list shows, lots are the most frequent addition to a horoscope (95). The second most frequent category is the prenatal syzygy, with 23, followed by the Moon’s nodes (18) and the <i>oikodespotes</i> (14). A very few include fixed stars (7), <i>dodekatemoria</i> (7), latitudes (5) or steps (4), presiding and managing planets (4) or <i>monomoiriai</i> (3). We should point out that of the extant horoscopes including additional technical data, most do not include large quantities of them, but concentrate on a few as needed for a specific interpretation. This makes our horoscope even more rare. To illustrate its exceptionality, we shall now look at the commonalities and differences between this and four other elaborate horoscopes of comparable length and content.</p>

<h2>Elaborate Horoscopes: Examples and Comparisons</h2>

<p>Only a small number of elaborate horoscopes approach the detail of ours. For a comparison, we shall look at four elaborate horoscopes, pertaining to nativities from the first through the fifth centuries CE (and thus probably composed from the late first through the sixth centuries), that contain at least five types of technical data in addition to the basic longitudes of planets, luminaries and cardines/angles. These include three original horoscopes on papyri and one preserved through the medieval manuscript tradition in multiple copies.</p>

<h3>P.Lond. 1.130 (Hor. gr. 81.III.31 = GH 81)</h3>

<p>This papyrus horoscope is dated to March 31, 81 CE, so was likely calculated in the late first to early second century CE.<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-7" href="#footnote-commiii-7">7</a></sup> It consists of nine columns and 213 lines, and is completely preserved. Unusually for an original documentary chart, its author, Titus Pitenius, identifies himself in a kind of colophon. It includes the following technical data also occurring in our horoscope: dignities (house, terms, triplicity, exaltation, decan), <i>dodekatemoria</i>, fixed stars, Lot of Fortune, <i>oikodespotes</i>. In addition, it contains information on decans in their Egyptian names, the gender and quadruplicity (tropical, solid, double-bodied) of a planet’s or luminary’s sign, planetary phases in relation to the sun,<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-8" href="#footnote-commiii-8">8</a></sup> and the number of days of the pregnancy.<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-9" href="#footnote-commiii-9">9</a></sup> It is similar to our horoscope in terms of length and in the abundance of technical data calculated. There is an emphasis in P.Lond. 1.130 on the locations of heavenly bodies and the Midheaven in relation to fixed stars or constellations. The wording used for the calculation of the Lot of Fortune is problematic, and has been addressed by both Greenbaum and Heilen.<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-10" href="#footnote-commiii-10">10</a></sup> The calculation of the house-master (<i>oikodespotes</i>), which turns out to be Mercury, is consistent with the rules of Vettius Valens, Dorotheus and, later, Porphyry.<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-11" href="#footnote-commiii-11">11</a></sup> <i>Dodekatemoria</i> are calculated (wrongly, as Neugebauer and Van Hoesen correctly note)<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-12" href="#footnote-commiii-12">12</a></sup> only for the Sun and Moon.</p>

<h3>P.Lond. 1.98 (Hor. gr. 95.IV.13 = GH 95)</h3>

<p>This is another elaborate horoscope containing numerous technical data. Parts of the papyrus are missing or severely damaged; in particular, little remains of what was presumably its first column, comprising an introductory section followed by sections pertaining to the Sun and Moon. The horoscope proper consists of 81 lines. It is immediately followed by a text, large parts of which have been made illegible through erasure, headed "Prognostications of the 5 stars [i.e. the planets] concerning life," and comprising 36 lines in Greek and 73 in Egyptian though written in an adaptation of the Greek alphabet ("Old Coptic"). We are not concerned here with this text, which, consisting as it does of extensive statements concerning the life of the native derived from elements of the horoscope, is unparalleled in any other known Greek horoscope on papyrus. Like our horoscope, P.Lond. 1.98 includes the dignities of house, exaltation and terms, as well as <i>dodekatemoria</i>, latitude, and <i>oikodespotes</i>. Additionally, it distinguishes between “bright horoscopes” and decans, supplying information for both.<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-13" href="#footnote-commiii-13">13</a></sup> It claims to have three “lots,” but these are more likely a reference to places in the chart (the Demotic Egyptian term <i>tny.t</i>, “lot,” can also mean, in an astrological context, a “place,” Greek <i>topos</i>).<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-14" href="#footnote-commiii-14">14</a></sup></p>

<h3>P. Oxy. astr. 4277 (Hor. gr. 150-250b)</h3>
<p>Dated paleographically (and hence only roughly) to the second half of the second century CE, this incomplete horoscope consists of two fragments, the first with three columns of 40, 35 and 9 lines respectively, and the second containing 5 lines.  Included in what remains of the papyrus are the positions and descriptions of Mercury, the Ascendant, Descendant, Midheaven and Lower Midheaven; and the four lots Fortune, Daimon, Eros and Necessity. Horoscopes with these four lots are quite rare in the extant corpus.<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-15" href="#footnote-commiii-15">15</a></sup> Even as a fragmentary document missing all planetary positions except for Mercury, P. Oxy. astr. 4277 includes dignities (house, term, triplicity, exaltation, decan), <i>dodekatemoria</i>, <i>monomoiriai</i>, lots, steps and winds, planetary stations and descriptions of the zodiacal signs involved, such as gender and quadruplicity.</p>

<h3>The "Eutocius" horoscope (Hor. gr. 497.X.28 = GH L497)</h3>
<p>Dated October 28, 497, this horoscope is transmitted complete in two Byzantine Greek manuscripts, <i>Laur. Plut.</i> 28,34 ff. 141v-143v, and <i>Par. gr.</i> 2425 ff. 216v-219v, under the title "From the astrological writings [ἀστρολογουμένων] of Eutocius," and abridged in a few other manuscripts without the attribution to Eutocius.<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-16" href="#footnote-commiii-16">16</a></sup> Its author is presumably Eutocius of Ascalon (fl. early sixth century CE), the author of extant commentaries on mathematical works of Archimedes and editor of a recension (with commentaries) of Books 1-4 of Apollonius's <i>Conics</i>.<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-17" href="#footnote-commiii-17">17</a></sup> The introductory passage indicates that the horoscope is offered as an example of how "the computation of a chart" should be set out; in other words, it is a didactic model that, unlike most horoscopes provided in ancient astrological treatises, is meant to illustrate not techniques of astrological prognostication but rather the format appropriate for an elaborate horoscope.<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-18" href="#footnote-commiii-18">18</a></sup> It is in fact one of the most elaborate horoscopes we have.</p>

<p>The technical data which match those in our horoscope are: dignities (house, terms [Ptolemaic and Egyptian], triplicity [all rulers<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-19" href="#footnote-commiii-19">19</a></sup>], exaltation/depression), <i>monomoiria</i>, fixed stars near the planets (with step, magnitude, longitude and latitude), the Lots of Fortune and Daimon, lunar nodes and prenatal syzygy. The planets are also described by their step, magnitude, longitude and latitude. In addition to these, the chart also supplies the planetary decan and face, and planetary phase of appearance in relation to the Sun.</p>

<p>Table 7 provides an easy-to-see comparison between the technical data of our horoscope and those with which it has been compared in the previous paragraphs.</p>

<table>
 <colgroup><col width="175"/>
 <col width="97"/>
 <col width="97"/>
 <col width="111"/>
 <col width="111"/>
 <col width="92"/>
 </colgroup>
 
<tr>
<td>Types of technical data:</td>
<td>P. Berl. 9825</td>
<td>P. Oxy. astr.  4277</td>
<td>P. Lond. 1.130</td>
<td>P. Lond. 1.98</td>
<td>Eutocius</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td><b>Dignities: house</b></td>
<td>X</td>
<td>X</td>
<td>X</td>
<td>X</td>
<td>X</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td><b>term</b></td>
<td>X</td>
<td>X</td>
<td>X</td>
<td>X</td>
<td>X</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td><b>triplicity</b></td>
<td>X</td>
<td>X</td>
<td>X</td>
<td>&#160;</td>
<td>X</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td><b>exaltation/depression</b></td>
<td>X</td>
<td>X</td>
<td>X</td>
<td>X</td>
<td>X</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td><b>Latitude</b></td>
<td>X</td>
<td>&#160;</td>
<td>&#160;</td>
<td>X (but missing)</td>
<td>X</td></tr>

<tr>
<td><b>Step &amp; direction</b></td>
<td>X</td>
<td>X</td>
<td>&#160;</td>
<td>X (but missing)</td>
<td>X</td></tr>

<tr>
<td><b>Magnitude</b></td>
<td>X</td>
<td>&#160;</td>
<td>X</td>
<td>&#160;</td>
<td>X</td></tr>

<tr>
<td><b><i>Monomoiria</i></b></td>
<td>X</td>
<td>X</td>
<td>&#160;</td>
<td>&#160;</td>
<td>X</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td><b><i>Dodekatemorion</i></b></td>
<td>X</td>
<td>X</td>
<td>X</td>
<td>X</td>
<td>&#160;</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td><b>Fixed stars (<i>paranatellonta</i>)</b></td>
<td>X</td>
<td>&#160;</td>
<td>X</td>
<td>&#160;</td>
<td>X</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td><b>Lots</b></td>
<td>Fortune, Daimon, Eros, Necessity, Courage, Victory, Nemesis</td>
<td>Fortune, Daimon, [Eros], Necessity</td>
<td>Fortune (?)</td>
<td>? (Items called ‘lots’ are probably not)<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-20" href="#footnote-commiii-20">20</a></sup></td>
<td>Fortune, Daimon</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td><b>Lunar Nodes</b></td>
<td>X</td>
<td>&#160;</td>
<td>&#160;</td>
<td>&#160;</td>
<td>X</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td><b>Master/House-master</b></td>
<td>X</td>
<td>&#160;</td>
<td>X</td>
<td>X</td>
<td>&#160;</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td><b>Presiding and Managing</b></td>
<td>X</td>
<td>&#160;</td>
<td>&#160;</td>
<td>&#160;</td>
<td>&#160;</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td><b>Prenatal Syzygy</b></td>
<td>X</td>
<td>&#160;</td>
<td>&#160;</td>
<td>&#160;</td>
<td>X</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>Dignities: decan</td>
<td>&#160;</td>
<td>X</td>
<td>X</td>
<td>X</td>
<td>X</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>face</td>
<td>&#160;</td>
<td>&#160;</td>
<td>&#160;</td>
<td>&#160;</td>
<td>X</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>Phase in rel. to Sun</td>
<td>&#160;</td>
<td>&#160;</td>
<td>X</td>
<td>&#160;</td>
<td>X</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>Planetary stations</td>
<td>&#160;</td>
<td>X</td>
<td>X</td>
<td>&#160;</td>
<td>&#160;</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>Gender of planet’s sign</td>
<td>&#160;</td>
<td>X</td>
<td>X</td>
<td>&#160;</td>
<td>&#160;</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>Quadruplicity</td>
<td>&#160;</td>
<td>X</td>
<td>X</td>
<td>&#160;</td>
<td>&#160;</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>“Bright Horoscopes”</td>
<td>&#160;</td>
<td>&#160;</td>
<td>&#160;</td>
<td>X</td>
<td>&#160;</td>
</tr>

</table>

<p class="textindent0">Key:</p>

<p><b>Bold</b> = data used in P.Berl. 9825</p>

<p>Regular = data used in other elaborate horoscopes but not in P.Berl. 9825</p>

<p>Table 7. Technical Data in P.Berl. 9825 Compared to Other Elaborate Horoscopes.</p>

<h3>An Analysis of the Technical Data Used in P.Berl. 9825</h3>

<p>We now explore some of the technical data presented in the papyrus in their astrological meaning and context. This exposition will provide possible rationales for including them in the calculation of a horoscope. The data to be discussed are:</p>

 <ul>
  <li>Dignities</li>

<li>Monomoiria</li>

<li><i>Dodekatemoria</i></li>

<li>Presiding and Managing</li>

<li>Length of life<ul>

 <li>Pre-natal syzygy</li>

<li>Master of the nativity</li>
</ul>
</li>

<li>Lots</li>
</ul>

<p class="textindent0">Astrological manuals of the Greco-Roman period and Late Antiquity may supply both methods and reasons for the technical data used by practicing astrologers. Often, they are not used in a vacuum, but can be intertwined with one another to produce an interpretation for specific concerns a client might have, such as happiness, fortune and length of life. For our particular horoscope, doctrines outlined by Paulus Alexandrinus, a fourth-century CE astrologer practising in Alexandria, frequently coincide with those used in our horoscope. A number of them are given a thorough treatment in Paulus’s <i>Introduction to Astrology</i>, produced in 378 CE. The works of other astrologers will also be consulted in elucidating the reasons for using specific techniques. </p><div>For astrologers, horoscope interpretation necessarily involves a number of factors to be synthesized and applied. The <i>Compendium</i> of Rhetorius (fl. probably 6<span class="T34">th</span> century CE)<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-21" href="#footnote-commiii-21">21</a></sup> provides instructions for applying these. It<span class="T38"> </span>includes seven considerations for the astrological interpretation of a birthchart, especially in delineating the circumstances at birth, the parents, and fortunate or unfortunate life circumstances. Technical data to be considered include dignities (especially triplicity/trigon lords), the latitude of the Moon’s winds, the position of the new or full moon prior to birth, lots (especially the Lots of Fortune, Daimon, Basis and Exaltation), and the ascending and descending nodes of the Moon. Another text, attributed by Franz Cumont to a Byzantine compiler who excerpted Rhetorius (<i>Par. gr.</i> 2506, fol. 73 and <i>Ven.</i> 7, fol. 170, in <i>CCAG</i> 8.1: 243-244) tells us to examine “the decans or faces...the <i>monomoiriai</i>, the bright degrees, the <i>dodekatemoria</i>, and the latitudes of the winds and the steps; the phases, stations and the co-risings of the fixed stars nearest by degree to them...”.<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-22" href="#footnote-commiii-22">22</a></sup> The same document also recommends looking at the pre-natal conjunction or opposition of Sun and Moon (i.e. new or full Moon). Thus, as outlined by Rhetorius, our papyrus gives data for performing a very complete horoscope analysis.</div>

<h3>Dignities</h3>

<p clas="textindent0">Dignities are frequently added to extant horoscopes, as well as mentioned in astrological manuals. A definition of each type of dignity used in our horoscope can be found above in the astronomical commentary. Dignities are important in interpretation because they allow assesment of the quality and power of the planet involved. They also allow the astrologer to assess the interaction between planets based on their rulerships and rulers.</p>

<p>Each kind of dignity can provide more nuance in evaluation. For example, the term ruler of a luminary was often used as a factor in length of life. But the various rulers – house, exaltation, triplicity, term and decan – could also be used to find an overall chart ruler, or the ruler of a specific topic.<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-23" href="#footnote-commiii-23">23</a></sup> This discussion will briefly give some of the reasons that dignities are used in astrological interpretation, accompanied by the details of our horoscope.</p>

<p>1. <i>House rulership</i>. This is the most commonly reported dignity, and often mentioned in chart interpretation. The house ruler is essential to the construction of the “<i>thema mundi</i>,” a symbolic chart for the birthday of the cosmos,<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-24" href="#footnote-commiii-24">24</a></sup> where each planet falls in one its zodiacal houses. The nativity of any person can be compared to the <i>thema mundi</i> as an example of an “ideal” chart.<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-25" href="#footnote-commiii-25">25</a></sup> In our horoscope, the house ruler is missing for the Sun (as all details are) and Moon. All other house rulers are correct.</p>

<p>2. <i>Term</i> rulership. In systems of finding rulers for length of life, the term ruler of a “predominating” planet can become the primary indicator of longevity. In our horoscope all the term rulers are correct except for Venus, which (using the Egyptian system) should be in the terms of Mars, not Saturn.</p>

<p>3. <i>Triplicity</i> rulership. The triplicity lords, especially of the sect luminaries (i.e., the Sun for a day chart and the Moon for a night chart), are used for different purposes, including assessments for eminence (Valens, <i>Anthology</i> II, 2 and 22 [Pingree 1986]) and for gaining happiness, fortune or property (Dorotheus, <i>Carmen Astrologicum</i> I, 24-26 and Valens II, 2).</p>

<p>In our horoscope, triplicity rulers are given for eight positions including the lunar nodes (Sun is missing). For four planets these are correct: Moon, Saturn, Venus and Mercury; incorrect are the triplicity rulers for Jupiter, Mars and both lunar nodes. The errors show a tendency on the part of the chart’s composer to list the diurnal triplicity rulers for earth and water instead of the nocturnal rulers.</p>

<p>4. <i>Exaltation and Depression</i>. The effect of exaltation is similar to that of house. A planet in its exaltation is fortified for effective action, and can aid planets located in its sign of exaltation. Conversely, a planet in the sign of its depression is weak and ineffective, or even harmful.</p>

<p>In our horoscope the exaltations are given for four positions: Saturn, Jupiter, Venus and the descending node (the Moon’s is missing, and no planets are exalted in the signs of Scorpio and Sagittarius, where Mars, Mercury and the ascending node are located). Depressions are given for Moon, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars and the ascending node (there is no exaltation or depression in Sagittarius, where Mercury lies, and in Taurus, where the descending node lies). All exaltations and depressions are accurate.</p>



<h3>Monomoiriai</h3>

<p>Our horoscope includes data on <i>monomoiriai</i> by sign. Chapter 5 of Paulus’s <i>Introduction</i> explains this doctrine (another form, by trigon/triplicity, is discussed in Chapter 32). This process is dependent on the house-ruler of the sign, and the so-called Chaldean order of the planets (Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sun, Venus, Mercury, Moon). To find the planetary ruler of the <i>monomoiria</i> (which means ‘single degree’) of a sign’s degree, one starts with the house ruler of that sign, which rules its first degree. Thus, for Aries and Scorpio, Mars is the ruler of the first degree. The process continues with the planets in Chaldean order through the rest of the degrees of Aries and Scorpio – the second degree’s ruler is the Sun, the third degree’s Venus, and so on. For the Venus-ruled signs of Taurus and Libra, one begins with Venus for the first degree’s ruler, Mercury for the second degree, Moon for the third degree, Saturn for the fourth degree, and so on. Paulus provides a table at the end of Chapter 5. A scholion for this chapter<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-26" href="#footnote-commiii-26">26</a></sup><span class="T38"> </span>states that <i>monomoiriai</i> can connect (by “sympathy”) two planets otherwise unrelated to each other, since it assigns degrees based on planets ruling signs that may not make a conventional aspect, such as Aries and Scorpio (both ruled by Mars). </p>

<p>Vettius mentions <i>monomoiriai</i> in his <i>Anthology</i>, IV, 26 (Pingree 1986), which seem to operate under the same set of rules that Paulus gives for the <i>monomoiria</i> by sign. <i>Monomoiria</i> are also mentioned in Ch. XXXV of the <i>Liber Hermetis</i><sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-27" href="#footnote-commiii-27">27</a></sup> but these seem to be the <i>monomoiria</i> by triplicity (also covered in Paulus,  Ch. 32). In original documentary horoscopes, the calculation of the <i>monomoiria</i> is rare. We find it calculated for the Midheaven, Lower midheaven, Lot of Fortune and Lot of Daimon in one "deluxe horoscope," P.Oxy. astr. 4277 (Hor. gr. 150-250b).<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-28" href="#footnote-commiii-28">28</a></sup> In the Eutocius horoscope <i>monomoiriai</i> are calculated for all five planets and the two luminaries, the prenatal full Moon, the Ascendant, Midheaven, Lot of Fortune and Lot of Daimon. In our horoscope, the <i>monomoirai</i> are all correct except for that of Mercury.</p>


<h3>Dodekatemoria</h3>

<p><i>Dodekatemorion</i> means, simply, ‘twelfth-part’. It can be used to refer to any twelfth-part of something – a twelfth-part of the 360° circle, i.e. one zodiacal sign; a twelfth-part of a sign of 30°, i.e. 2 ½°; or any portion of 12 degrees. The concept originates with the Babylonians.<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-29" href="#footnote-commiii-29">29</a></sup><span class="T32"> </span>Paulus discusses the doctrine of <i>dodekatemoria</i> in Chapter 22. The doctrine is known in other authors, such as Julius Firmicus Maternus (<i>Mathesis</i> II, 13.2-3), but Firmicus multiplies the degrees of the sign by 12 and adds that sum to 0° of the sign to produce the <i>dodekatemorion</i>, while Paulus multiplies by 13, which effectively takes into account the actual degree of the sign in question. The Babylonian system, as Rochberg demonstrates, matches what Paulus does: “Given a position in the zodiac (longitude [<i>l</i>]<span class="T28">1</span> expressed in degrees (<i>n</i>) of a zodiacal sign (<i>z</i>), a second position in the zodiac (<i>l</i><span class="T28">2</span>)<span class="T32"> </span>[i.e. the <i>dodekatemorion</i>]<span class="T32"> </span>may be obtained by multiplying the degrees <i>n</i> by 12 and adding the result to the first longitude [<i>l</i><span class="T39">1</span> = <i>n</i>° of <i>z</i>]: <i>l</i><span class="T39">2</span> = 12<i>n</i> + <i>n</i>° of <i>z</i>.”<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-30" href="#footnote-commiii-30">30</a></sup> As an example, Paulus gives Aries 11°. He multiplies the degrees by 13, yielding 143°. He adds that sum to the beginning of Aries: 143° + 0° [Aries 0°] = 143° = Leo 23°. (Effectively 12<i>n</i> + <i>n</i> + <i>z</i> = 13<i>n</i> + <i>z</i>.)</p>

<p>Olympiodorus (Ch. 20; Boer 1962: 41.12-20) uses the example of an Ascendant at Scorpio 20°. Multiplying 20° by 13 = 260°. Add that to the beginning of Scorpio, i.e. 210°: 260° + 210° = 470°. 470 - 360 = 110°, or Cancer 20°. (Olympiodorus explains this differently, but effectively this is what he is doing.)</p><div>The calculation of <i>dodekatemoria</i> is rare in original documentary horoscopes, as we saw above.<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-31" href="#footnote-commiii-31">31</a></sup><span class="T32"> </span></div>

<p>In our horoscope only the sign of the <i>dodekatemorion</i> is given, not the degrees. The <i>dodekatemoria</i> for the Moon, Saturn, Jupiter (for the corrected position of Virgo 3° 40', not Virgo 7° 40'), Mars and Venus match what the Paulus formula would produce. However, the positions of Mercury, both lunar nodes and the prenatal full Moon’s <i>dodekatemoria</i> do not match what Paulus’s formula would produce (they do match the Firmicus formula which also fits for Saturn, Jupiter [corrected position] and Mars). Two possibilities could explain this result. First, the birthchart’s constructor did use the Paulus formula, but neglected to calculate the minutes of each position, at least for Mercury, the nodes and the prenatal full moon (the <i>dodekatemorion</i> for Mercury is Gemini 0° 29', almost in Taurus where the text says it is). Since no degrees are given for the <i>dodekatemoria</i>, only signs, this could have been a further truncation of the entire procedure. Or, the chart’s constructor could have been using the Firmicus formula, but miscalculated for the Moon and Venus.</p>

<p>Paulus tells us that this procedure is important for obtaining information about whether someone will be ‘fortunate, long-lived and blessed’ (Ch. 22, Boer 1958: 46.15-16) or make them ‘laborers, ... unable to acquire property and cursed’(Ch. 22, Boer 1958: 46.21-22); such people will also have short lives, violent deaths, illnesses and injuries (Ch. 22, Boer 1958: 46.23). If the <i>dodekatemorion</i> of a benefic falls in the sign of the natal Sun, Moon, Mercury, cardines, Lots of Fortune, Daimon or Necessity, or on the prenatal lunation, this is said to be fortunate, but when a malefic’s <i>dodekatemorion</i> falls there, the effects are unfortunate. </p>



<h3>Presiding and Managing</h3>

<p>Few authors except for Paulus mention the concept of presiding and managing. The earliest appears to be Serapion, in a text on <i>katarchai</i>.<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-32" href="#footnote-commiii-32">32</a></sup> Antiochus of Athens<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-33" href="#footnote-commiii-33">33</a></sup> gives outcomes for those born when certain hour rulers manage during a day, usually based on whether the planetary ruler is a benefic or malefic.<span class="T32"> </span>Another text, by “Zenarion” (about whom nothing further is known) also uses the technique in katarchic charts.<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-34" href="#footnote-commiii-34">34</a></sup></p>

<p>In Chapter 21, “On the Star Presiding and the One Managing” Paulus outlines the technique and promotes its use both in nativities and <i>katarchai</i>. He further approves its use in decumbitures, a chart cast for when an ill person takes to his or her bed. Paulus’s method depends, first, on finding the god ruling over the day in question (Ch. 20, ‘On Knowing to which of the Gods Each Day Belongs’). This is the god traditionally assigned to each day of the week. Thus, if the day in question is a Sunday, the Sun is the god of the day. Once the god (i.e. planet) of the day is known, that planet presides over the entire 24-hour day, which is sectioned into 12 day and 12 night hours.<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-35" href="#footnote-commiii-35">35</a></sup> The presiding planet rules the 1<span class="T29">st</span>,  8<span class="T29">th</span>, 15<span class="T29">th</span> and 22<span class="T29">nd</span> hours of that day. The hour rulers are assigned in the so-called Chaldean order from the presiding planet, and become the ‘managers’ of that hour, beginning with the first hour of the day. Olympiodorus, Paulus’s commentator, covers the same material (Ch. 18). As an example, the well-known katarchic horoscope for the crowning of Leontius at Antioch (Hor. gr. 484.VII.18 = GH L484), lists Mercury as <span class="T25">πολευ</span>́<span class="T25">ων</span> and διέπων, and uses this as the reason the chart was not successful: “but they [the astrologers] did not pay attention, first, that the presiding and managing [planet], Mercury, had fallen into misfortune (<span class="T25">εἰς</span> <span class="T25">πα</span>́<span class="T25">θος</span>). For it was at its greatest [distance] from the Sun, which brings about violent death, and it was aspected only by Saturn.”<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-36" href="#footnote-commiii-36">36</a></sup></p>

<p>Only three other extant horoscopes include this technique: all are from literary sources, with dates in the fifth century CE (Hor. gr. 475.VII.16 = GH L475, Hor. gr. 479.VII.14 = GH L479, and 487.IX.5 = GH L487, the last of which mentions only the managing ruler).</p>

<p>In our horoscope, the planets presiding and managing are listed as Jupiter and Saturn. These would be correct if this was a diurnal chart for the 7th hour of the day of 319 CE, November 19, but this horoscope is nocturnal and belongs to the night preceding the day of November 19.<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-37" href="#footnote-commiii-37">37</a></sup> In the system outlined by Paulus, and also mentioned by Vettius Valens, an anonymous Christian writer on the hours of the day of the week, and Cassius Dio,<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-38" href="#footnote-commiii-38">38</a></sup> the 24-hour day begins at sunrise with the planetary day hours. This is the usual epoch for this system, probably arising from the fact that the Hellenistic Egyptians began the day at sunrise. But other epochs were also in use, in which the 24-hour day could begin at sunset.<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-39" href="#footnote-commiii-39">39</a></sup> Neugebauer and Van Hoesen mention horoscopes in the fourth century that use an evening epoch, and a calendar of 354 CE does as well.<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-40" href="#footnote-commiii-40">40</a></sup></p>

<p>So it seems that the author of our horoscope was using an evening epoch with the Alexandrian calendar, where the day begins at sunset, and begins it by applying the usual rulers of the day hours to this evening epoch. Even though it was still Wednesday, November 18, in a day epoch (where the presiding planet would be Mercury and the managing planet, Mars, rules the 7<span class="T34">th </span>hour), in an evening epoch the presiding planet would be Jupiter (the presiding planet for Thursday November 19, 319), and the planet managing the 7<span class="T34">th</span> hour is Saturn. Because the beginning of the text is lost, we cannot know for certain how the author dated it. But this explanation seems plausible based on our knowledge of the use of epochs in this timeframe. Though it does contradict the common practice of planetary days and hours outlined by Paulus, the author was not necessarily incorrect in using the day rulers for an evening epoch, even if he was unorthodox. </p>



<h3>Length of Life: Master of the Nativity and the Prenatal Syzygy</h3>

<p>Although we have no way of knowing how the author of our chart planned to use the calculated information, discovering length of life is an important consideration addressed by ancient astrologers. Aside from the use of term rulers, two of the techniques used to determine this are included in our chart: the housemaster/master of the nativity, and the prenatal syzygy.</p>

<h4>Master of the Nativity</h4>

<p>This is yet another technique mentioned by Paulus in his <i>Introduction</i>. Chapter 36, “On Housemastership” (Περὶ οἰκοδεσποτείας), provides the conditions under which a planet may become the chart ruler (or, to use Paulus’s term, the κύρια τῆς γενέσεως, authority of the nativity). The Sun and Moon are most important in this process, the Sun being used in a day chart, but the Moon at night. In a nocturnal chart, as ours is, one looks at the term-ruler and house-steward (οἰκοδέκτωρ) of the Moon, and then at whether the Sun or Moon (depending on the sect of the chart) are in ‘effective’ places. At night, the effective places are the four cardines, the fifth (Good Fortune), eleventh (Good Daimon), second and eighth.</p>

<p>Let us apply these rules to our papyrus. In a nocturnal nativity, we look at the Moon. We know that the Ascendant is Virgo 10° 57', and that the Moon is likely to fall between 24° (roughly its mean position) and 27° Cancer. Using the whole-sign place system, the Moon will fall in the 11<sup>th</sup> place, that of the Good Daimon, which is an effective place. The term-ruler for the Moon at 26° Cancer is still Jupiter, but in the next degree moves to Saturn in the Egyptian system. That the horoscope gives Jupiter as the ‘master of the nativity’ would therefore suggest a position of around 26° for the Moon (as also suggested in Part I of this commentary). The house-steward of the Moon in Cancer is, of course, the Moon. Jupiter is also in an effective place, the first (including the entire sign of Virgo as the first place). So far it seems that the Moon and Jupiter have equal claim on rulership.</p>

<p>Then Paulus says “when one star has more counts than the others and is found at morning rising [in a phase of visibility] on a cardine and in its own throne, this one has the rulership, especially if it oversees (κατοπτεύω) the sect luminary.”<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-41" href="#footnote-commiii-41">41</a></sup> Jupiter has no counts of rulership in the early degrees of Virgo (in fact, its depression is Virgo). It sextiles the Moon, the sect luminary, by sign (but in fact, by degree makes no aspect). (It also sextiles the other luminary, the Sun, by sign.) It is in a phase of visibility, and would appear in the eastern sky before the sun rises. It is also in a cardine, the Ascendant/first place. By contrast, the Moon is in its own house and face, which would give it two counts to Jupiter’s zero. It is not on a cardine, but it is the sect luminary. This would seem to give the Moon an edge over Jupiter. Further, since both Jupiter and the Moon are in effective places, and Paulus says that if a luminary is in an effective place it becomes the ruler, it would seem that the Moon should have been chosen. However, it may be that the astrologer has (incorrectly) moved to Paulus’s next condition: examining the term-ruler, triplicity lord or house-steward of the prenatal Full Moon (for a nocturnal birth).</p>

<h4>The Prenatal Syzygy</h4>
<p>The preceding full Moon took place at Taurus 20° 30'. This is the house of Venus, the term of Jupiter and the triplicity of the Moon. This position falls, however, in the ninth place, not usually considered an effective place (although it is a “good decline” and the place of the Sun god).<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-42" href="#footnote-commiii-42">42</a></sup> If the prenatal full Moon is not in an effective place, Paulus says, one must look at the triplicity, house and term rulers of the Lots of Fortune or Daimon; and also the lord of the Ascendant.</p>

<p>The Lot of Fortune falls in the 10<sup>th</sup> degree of Capricorn: triplicity of the Moon, house of Saturn and term of Jupiter. The Lot of Daimon falls in the 13<sup>th</sup> degree of Taurus: triplicity of the Moon, house of Venus, term of Mercury. The lord of the Ascendant is Mercury. We know that the Moon and Jupiter are in effective places; Saturn is in the eighth (effective), Venus in the second (also effective) and Mercury in the fourth (effective). ‘And if the one ruling these places is found being aspected in the aforegiven places with that one which it has received, it will be taken as the authority of the nativity.’<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-43" href="#footnote-commiii-43">43</a></sup> In our chart, the Moon opposes Fortune by sign, Saturn squares it and Jupiter trines it. The Moon sextiles Daimon by sign, makes no aspect to Venus (but both are in Venus-ruled signs) and no aspect to Mercury. Mercury squares the Ascendant. There seems to be no clear winner here. Jupiter is not particularly dominant; it is only the term ruler of the Lot of Fortune. Although it is in an effective place and trines Fortune, this rationale seems weak for giving it the rulership instead of the Moon.</p>

<p>For Venus sharing the rulership, there are the following considerations. Venus is in its own house. It is in a phase of visibility (rising before the sun and not combust). It is in an effective place (the 2<sup>nd</sup>) in a nocturnal horoscope, according to Paulus.</p>

<p>However, it is still something of a mystery as to why the astrologer chose Jupiter as the “master of the nativity,” unless the fact that it was well placed in the Ascendant, well ahead of the sun and in a phase of visibility, is the term ruler of the prenatal full Moon and aspects both the luminaries and the Lot of Fortune, gives it more advantages than the equally well-placed and more dignified Moon.</p>

<h3>Lots</h3>
<p>Lots have an oversized presence in our horoscope: seven lots are prominently featured. Our horoscope is the earliest, and only original documentary, chart to contain so many lots.<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-44" href="#footnote-commiii-44">44</a></sup> Using the formulae of Paulus, they are calculated by degree and minute, and supplied with both their house and term ruler. More exclusively, then, than the other techniques supplied in this horoscope, these lots are directly associated with Paulus Alexandrinus. Besides his later commentator Olympiodorus, he is the only author in the extant corpus to provide formulae for these lots. His chapter on lots mentions each by name, with its formula, and associates it with a planet: “Suitably, the lots have this origin: since by nature the Moon is set down as Fortune, the Sun Daimon, Aphrodite Eros, the [star] of Hermes Necessity, that of Ares Courage, that of Zeus Victory, and that of Kronos Nemesis.”<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-45" href="#footnote-commiii-45">45</a></sup> This order matches the listing of the lots in our horoscope. Paulus’s commentator, Olympiodorus (writing in 564 CE),<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-46" href="#footnote-commiii-46">46</a></sup> spells out the direct connection of each lot to a celestial body: “...7 lots owing to the number of the 7 stars.”<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-47" href="#footnote-commiii-47">47</a></sup></p>

<p>At present this is the only documentary horoscope to contain all of the “planetary” lots that Paulus describes, using the formulae he provides. In literary horoscopes, one rather corrupt text associated with Olympiodorus likely calculates the Lot of Eros according to Paulus’s formula.<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-48" href="#footnote-commiii-48">48</a></sup> No other documentary or literary horoscope up to the end of Late Antiquity uses any of Paulus’s lot formulae for the Lots of Eros, Necessity, Courage, Victory or Nemesis. In the Arabic period, a horoscope transmitted by Abū Ma‘shar includes the Lots of Courage and Victory, and a lot called “Intellect and Native Wit,” the formula of which is identical to the Paulus formula for the Lot of Necessity.<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-49" href="#footnote-commiii-49">49</a></sup> Finally, a nativity calculated for September 3, 905 CE, calculates, among others, the Lots of Fortune, Daimon and Eros.<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-50" href="#footnote-commiii-50">50</a></sup> But the calculation for the Lot of Eros does not use Paulus’s formula.<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-51" href="#footnote-commiii-51">51</a></sup></p>

<h2>The “Planetary” Lots in Context</h2>

<p>Prior to the discovery of this horoscope, only one literary and no documentary horoscopes contained the Lots of Eros and/or Necessity using Paulus’s formulae, and none before the end of Late Antiquity contained the Lots of Courage, Victory or Nemesis. Our horoscope is unique within the extant corpus in containing all seven lots as described, with formulae and meanings, by Paulus. </p>

<p>Before Paulus, who was writing in 378 CE,<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-52" href="#footnote-commiii-52">52</a></sup> the Lots of Fortune and (less so) Daimon appear somewhat regularly in documentary and literary horoscopes, as well as (albeit rarely) the Lots of Eros and Necessity.<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-53" href="#footnote-commiii-53">53</a></sup> Vettius Valens and Firmicus Maternus are the main authors who discuss interpretation and provide formulae for these four lots. However, the formulae they use for the Lots of Eros and Necessity are not those that Paulus specifies in his astrological treatise.<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-54" href="#footnote-commiii-54">54</a></sup> Thus, before the fourth century CE, no documentary evidence exists for use of the Paulus formulae, and no calculation of the Lots of Courage, Victory or Nemesis. In astrological texts said to antedate Paulus, only Antiochus of Athens provides a short section on these lots (see below).</p>

<p>Previous work on lots has posited two traditions of calculation for the lots of Eros and Necessity.<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-55" href="#footnote-commiii-55">55</a></sup> One tradition may be designated “Hermetic,” after the assertion by Olympiodorus and a scholiast for Paulus that these lots derive from a book by Hermes Trismegistus called the <i>Panaretos</i>.<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-56" href="#footnote-commiii-56">56</a></sup> The other tradition is called “Egyptian,” drawing on a scholion to a passage in Hephaestio’s <i>Apotelesmatika</i> III, 6.11, describing two methods for casting the Lots of  “Necessity and Eros according to Hermes Trismegistus or, just as in the 4<span class="T34">th</span> book, Dorotheus gives an account of the opinion of the Egyptians.”<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-57" href="#footnote-commiii-57">57</a></sup> This scholion thus supplies evidence of two lot traditions for these lots in antiquity. </p>

<p>One of Paulus’s passages on the planetary lots has a number of similarities to a passage that the later compiler Rhetorius claims are from the <i>Thesaurus</i> of Antiochus of Athens, whose probable <i>floruit</i> was the second century CE. Antiochus associates a planet or luminary with each lot, but gives no formula to calculate them, or an origin (we can assume they are the same lots Paulus describes because of the similar wording).<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-58" href="#footnote-commiii-58">58</a></sup> Possibly Paulus and Antiochus drew on a similar source, or Paulus was the first to come across this passage by Antiochus, because no other author in the extant literature before 378 CE mentions such lots. In the second century, Vettius Valens specifically associates the Lots of Fortune, Daimon, Eros and Necessity with several astrological techniques (e.g. <i>Anthology</i> II 37, IV 4-10, 25 [Pingree 1986]), but does not use the Paulus formulae and does not mention any other “planetary” lots. Paulus’s near contemporary, Firmicus Maternus, mentions a Lot of Nemesis along with his versions of the Lots of Eros and Necessity (<i>Mathesis</i>, VI.32), but his formulae for them also do not match Paulus’s.</p>

<p>It should be emphasized that Paulus himself does not mention Hermes as the originator of these lots, nor does the word “<i>Panaretos</i>” appear anywhere in his text, but only in the title of Chapter 23. The word <i>panaretos</i> means “all-virtuous.” In the extant corpus of Greek works, its association to a book, as in the phrase “παναρέτος βίβλος” (or variants) is rare.<i> Panaretos</i> does not appear in reference to a book until the fourth century CE. The phrase “<span class="hi1">παναρέτῳ</span> <span class="hi1">βίβλῳ”</span> appears in Pap. Mag. Leid. J 395 (PGM XIII.981-982) where it is associated with “Ptolemaica.”<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-59" href="#footnote-commiii-59">59</a></sup> Its association with Hermes Trismegistus appears only in the Paulus-connected texts. Other uses of the word <i>Panaretos</i> appear to be restricted to later ecclesiastical writings (there is mention in the fourth century of a “<i>Panaretos</i>” on the wisdom of Solomon).<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-60" href="#footnote-commiii-60">60</a></sup> It does not seem to have anything to do with the astrological <i>Panaretos</i>.</p>

<p>It is difficult to judge the date of the <i>Panaretos</i>.<span class="T16"> No extant texts earlier than the fourth century mention it. One could assume, as the Gundels did, that any Hermetic text would likely have been written around the 2</span><sup>nd</sup><span class="T16"> century BCE.</span><sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-61" href="#footnote-commiii-61">61</a></sup><span class="T16"> But that any mention of the </span><i>Panaretos</i><span class="T16"> does not arise until the fourth century suggests that the text was unknown before then. It may have been discovered during that time. In addition, Paulus does not mention Hermes Trismegistus as the author. Perhaps Olympiodorus attached the name of </span><span class="T16">Hermes to the text to give it authenticity, or the text did have the name of Hermes attached to it (but this was not noted until the Olympiodorus commentary). In any case, P.Berl. 9825, containing the chart of a birth in 319, fits into this fourth-century timeframe. Because of the uncertainty surrounding the origins of these lots, it is testamentary evidence of the work of Paulus Alexandrinus, as well as an exclusive and important witness to the use of all the “planetary lots” in practice.</span></p>

<h3>Conclusions</h3>

<p>This horoscope undoubtedly ranks among the most comprehensive of antiquity. The amount of technical data it includes puts it near, if not at the top, of elaborate horoscopes of antiquity. It is significant both astronomically and astrologically. </p>

<p>Astrologically, it is an astounding example of the variety of technical data and methods used by astrologers in late antiquity. As this astrological commentary has shown, a number of the techniques included in our horoscope’s data have been covered by Paulus Alexandrinus in his <i>Introduction</i>. Among his specialties, <i>dodekatemoria</i>, <i>monomoiriai</i>, presiding and managing planets and, especially, “planetary” lots, whose formulae Paulus is the first to delineate, appear in our papyrus. </p><div>While it is highly unlikely that a definitive author of this horoscope will ever be known, these connections to Paulus and his work provoke some further attention. The timeframe of 319 easily falls within Paulus’s lifetime (he wrote the <i>Introduction</i> in 378 CE). That the horoscope was cast for the latitude of Syene, in Upper Egypt, suggests an Egyptian link, and Paulus was known to have practiced astrology in Alexandria. A compelling piece of evidence is, of course, the seven planetary lots calculated with the formulae described first by Paulus (and, during Late Antiquity, later taken up only by his commentator Olympiodorus). It is possible, then, that the horoscope was calculated by someone following the practices of Paulus as a student, perhaps practicing the calculation of multiple techniques as a student exercise.<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-62" href="#footnote-commiii-62">62</a></sup> Equally, we have no way of knowing whose chart was calculated. Although the date of birth falls in the correct timeframe for Paulus himself, and there are examples of astrologers casting their own horoscopes both for personal use and as a teaching tool,<sup><a class="footnote-reference" id="footnote-reference-commiii-63" href="#footnote-commiii-63">63</a></sup> it goes beyond the bounds of speculation to suggest that the horoscope could be his. Though any final certainty is unlikely, the tantalizing authorial hints we obtain from this birthchart make it an even more unusual and important example of a late antique horoscope.</div>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-1"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-1">1</a></sup> See Jones 1999.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-2"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-2">2</a></sup> The term “dignities” is here used for convenience to describe the rulers of various portions or groups of zodiacal signs. At the time this horoscope was cast, there was no Greek equivalent word to describe this practice. See Bezza 2007: 240-241.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-3"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-3">3</a></sup> See Heilen 2015: 1.204-333; 2.522.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-4"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-4">4</a></sup> The Descendant and Lower Midheaven appear more seldom, but could easily be inferred, since the Descendant will be exactly opposite the Ascendant, and the Lower Midheaven exactly opposite the Midheaven. For the less frequent calculation of the Midheaven, see Hand 2007: 138-143.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-5"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-5">5</a></sup> Dignities have not been included in this tally, due to their more frequent use than the other techniques, especially in literary horoscopes where they are important for interpretation. An analysis of the reasons that a horoscope would include various dignity systems will appear below.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-6"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-6">6</a></sup> Preferring these criteria allows better comparison with horoscopes more similar to ours. Included rarely are Egyptian/“Old Coptic” (P.Lond. 1.98, but the horoscope proper is in Greek) and Egyptian/Demotic (OMM 134: see Ross 2006: 109-117; Ross 2011: 56-62) horoscopes containing technical data.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-7"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-7">7</a></sup> It is, of course, impossible to tell whether the horoscope was calculated shortly after the birth of the child or later (but obviously not before September 81: see Neugebauer &amp; Van Hoesen 1959: 24).</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-8"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-8">8</a></sup> For more on this technique, see Denningmann 2005: 386-474; Denningmann 2007.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-9"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-9">9</a></sup> On conception and pregnancy in astrology, see Frommhold 2004.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-10"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-10">10</a></sup> See Greenbaum 2007: 173-179, in part superseded in Greenbaum 2016: 333-334; Heilen 2015: 2.1167ff.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-11"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-11">11</a></sup> See Greenbaum 2016: 255-266, 424-425.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-12"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-12">12</a></sup> Neugebauer &amp; Van Hoesen 1959: 25.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-13"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-13">13</a></sup> For analysis, see Neugebauer &amp; Van Hoesen 1959: 36-37; Greenbaum and Ross 2010: 158-162.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-14"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-14">14</a></sup> See Neugebauer 1943: 116-117; Greenbaum 2016: 304 n. 7.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-15"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-15">15</a></sup> See Greenbaum 2016: 367-378.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-16"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-16">16</a></sup> Heilen 2010: 62; Heilen 2015: 1.310; Jones 1987: 21-22 and (for the relation of the manuscripts with the abridged version to Par. gr. 2425) 25.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-17"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-17">17</a></sup> The attribution to Eutocius was tentatively accepted by Neugebauer and Van Hoesen (Neugebauer &amp; Van Hoesen 1959: 188-189), with more definitive ascription and analysis by Heilen 2010: 62; see also Heilen 2015: 1.310 (and bibliography).</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-18"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-18">18</a></sup> Heilen 2010: 62; Heilen 2015: 1.310, citing Toomer 1976: 18 for the speculative suggestion that the horoscope may pertain to Eutocius's own birthdate.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-19"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-19">19</a></sup> As in the Dorothean system: see <i>Carmen Astrologicum</i> I, 1 (Pingree 1976).</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-20"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-20">20</a></sup> See Neugebauer &amp; Van Hoesen 1959: 36; Greenbaum 2016: 304 n. 7.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-21"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-21">21</a></sup> See Holden 2009: ix-x, <i>contra</i> Pingree 1976: xii. A critical edition of this text by Pingree is being prepared for publication by Stephan Heilen.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-22"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-22">22</a></sup> <i>CCAG</i> 8.1: 243.20-244.2: ...<span class="T25">τοὺς</span> <span class="T25">δεκανου</span>̀<span class="T25">ς</span> <span class="T25">η</span>̓́<span class="T25">τοι</span> <span class="T25">προ</span>́<span class="T25">σωπα</span>…<span class="T25">τὰς</span> <span class="T25">μονομοιρι</span>́<span class="T25">ας</span>, <span class="T25">τὰς</span> <span class="T25">λαμπρομοιρι</span>́<span class="T25">ας</span>, <span class="T25">τὰ</span> <span class="T25">δωδεκατεμο</span>́<span class="T25">ρια</span> <span class="T25">καὶ</span> <span class="T25">τὰ</span> <span class="T25">πλα</span>́<span class="T25">τη</span> <span class="T25">τῶν</span> <span class="T25">α</span>̓<span class="T25">νε</span>́<span class="T25">μων</span> <span class="T25">καὶ</span> <span class="T25">τοὺς</span> <span class="T25">βαθμου</span>́<span class="T25">ς</span>, <span class="T25">τὰς</span> <span class="T25">φα</span>́<span class="T25">σεις</span> <span class="T25">καὶ</span> <span class="T25">τοὺς</span> <span class="T25">στηριγμου</span>̀<span class="T25">ς</span> <span class="T25">καὶ</span> <span class="T25">τὰς</span> <span class="T25">τῶν</span> <span class="T25">α</span>̓<span class="T25">πλανω</span>͂<span class="T25">ν</span> <span class="T25">συνεγγιζου</span>́<span class="T25">σας</span> <span class="T25">αὐτοῖς</span> <span class="T25">μοιρικα</span>̀<span class="T25">ς</span> <span class="T25">παραναντολα</span>̀<span class="T25">ς</span>…”. Trans. Greenbaum.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-23"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-23">23</a></sup> These are various forms of a “housemaster” (<i>oikodespotes</i>). See Greenbaum 2016: 255-266.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-24"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-24">24</a></sup> Ascribed to Nechepso and Petosiris by Julius Firmicus Maternus, <i>Mathesis</i> III, Intro.4.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-25"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-25">25</a></sup> The earliest astrologer to do this was Thrasyllus, in <i>CCAG</i> 8.3: 100.27-30.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-26"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-26">26</a></sup> Scholion 15, Paulus, <i>Introduction to Astrology</i> (<i>Elementa Apotelesmatica</i>), ed. Boer 1958: 107.14-108.8.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-27"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-27">27</a></sup> Ed. Feraboli 1994: 224-232.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-28"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-28">28</a></sup> P. Oxy. astr. 4283 (Hor. gr. 250-350b) also mentions <i>monomoiria</i>.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-29"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-29">29</a></sup> See Rochberg-Halton 1988: 57-59 (reprinted in Rochberg 2010: 156-160); Neugebauer &amp; Van Hoesen 1959: 6.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-30"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-30">30</a></sup> Rochberg-Halton 1988: 58; Rochberg 2010: 157.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-31"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-31">31</a></sup> Seven charts include it: P.Oxy. 31.2555 (Hor. gr. 46.V.13), P.Lond. 1.130 (Hor. gr. 81.III.31), P.Lond. 1.98 (Hor. gr. 95.IV.13), P.Oxy. astr. 4277 (Hor. gr. 150-250b), Hor. gr. 479.VII.14, Hor. gr. 483.VII.8, and Hor. gr. 487.IX.5.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-32"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-32">32</a></sup> <i>CCAG</i> I: 99 (bottom).1-100.8.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-33"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-33">33</a></sup> <i>CCAG</i> VII: 114.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-34"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-34">34</a></sup> <i>CCAG</i> I: 128-129.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-35"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-35">35</a></sup> See the table of this in Greenbaum 2016: 135 (Table 4.1).</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-36"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-36">36</a></sup> <i>CCAG</i> I: 107.12-15; duplicated in <i>CCAG</i> VI: 66.25-67.1. Trans. Greenbaum.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-37"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-37">37</a></sup> Its data produce a horoscope cast for around the seventh hour of the night; the birth in fact would have taken place at about two hours after midnight but still on the previous day, Wednesday, November 18.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-38"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-38">38</a></sup> Valens, <i>Anthology</i> I, 9.3-11: Pingree 1986, 25.18-26.2; <i>CCAG</i> 7: 88-90 and Cassius Dio, <i>Roman History</i>, 37.18-19 (ed. Cary 1914-1927, vol. III), respectively. Cassius Dio ascribes this tradition to the Egyptians. These are just some of the sources that mention the planetary week and day and night hours. I am very grateful to Stephan Heilen for explaining the issue of epochs and their use in antiquity, as well as providing sources.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-39"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-39">39</a></sup> Neugebauer &amp; Van Hoesen 1959, 167-169 discuss epochs in antiquity. They mention both the Egyptian morning epoch and the Greek evening epoch, in reference to horoscope P.Lond. 1.130 (Hor. gr. 81.III.31), which uses the Alexandrian calendar: it may be “the outcome of a combination of the original Greek evening epoch with the traditional Egyptian morning epoch” (169, left column). So two kinds of epochs were used in antiquity.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-40"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-40">40</a></sup> Neugebauer &amp; Van Hoesen 1959, 168 right column; Divjak and Wischmeyer eds. 2014, I.110-139. See also a fragment from Potentia, Italy, ca. 100 CE: <i>CIL</i> IX, No. 5808.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-41"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-41">41</a></sup> Paulus, <i>Introduction</i>, Ch. 36, Boer 1958: 96.3-6. Trans. Greenbaum. Paulus normally uses κατοπτεύω to refer to difficult aspects – square or opposition – or aspects from a malefic. But in this context it may mean any aspect.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-42"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-42">42</a></sup> Paulus, <i>Introduction</i>, Ch. 24, Boer 1958: 63.8-10.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-43"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-43">43</a></sup> Ibid., ch. 36, Boer 1958: 96.22-97.1. Trans. Greenbaum. This means that the rulers of Fortune or Daimon must aspect the lots (“receive” them) in effective places in order to become the “authority of the nativity.” </p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-44"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-44">44</a></sup> Two literary horoscopes comparable to ours contain lots calculated according to Paulus’ formulae. They are dated 787 (in Abū Ma‘shar, <i>De revolutionibus nativitatum</i>, ed. Pingree 1968; Hor. gr. 787.VIII.10 in Heilen 2015: 1.313) and 905 CE (the nativity of Constantine VII Porphyrogenitus: see Pingree 1973; Hor. gr. 905.IX.3 in Heilen 2015: 1.314).</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-45"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-45">45</a></sup> Paulus, <i>Introduction</i>, Ch. 23, Boer 1958: 49.11-15. Trans. Greenbaum.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-46"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-46">46</a></sup> He mentions the dates of some of his lectures in his <i>Commentary on Paulus</i>. See also Westerink 1971, and Warnon 1967. In Chapter 21, he mentions that “Hermes Trismegistus has written about these lots in the book called<i> Panaretos</i>” (Boer 1962: 42.6-7). In Chapter 22 he again mentions Hermes Trismegistus in connection with the Lot of Fortune (Boer 1962: 46.8-12). Finally, he again says “And these...are the seven lots in the<i> Panaretos</i>, written about by the most divine Hermes Trismegistus, which Paulus set forth here.” (Boer 1962: 51.13-15). All trans. Greenbaum.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-47"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-47">47</a></sup> Olympiodorus, <i>Commentary</i>, Ch. 21.4, Boer 1962: 42.11-12. Trans. Greenbaum.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-48"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-48">48</a></sup> Olympiodorus, <i>Commentary</i>, Boer 1962: 59.8-15. See Greenbaum 2016: 375-377, 480.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-49"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-49">49</a></sup> Abū Ma‘shar, <i>De revolutionibus nativitatum</i>, Pingree 1968: 130.1-131.14.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-50"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-50">50</a></sup> Pingree 1973.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-51"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-51">51</a></sup> For more analysis of these last two mentioned charts, see Greenbaum 2016: 372-378, 479-482.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-52"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-52">52</a></sup> In Chapter 20 of his <i>Introduction</i>, he calculates on what day of the week ‘today, the 20<sup>th</sup> of Mecheir, 94 years from Diocletian’ fell. It is equivalent to February 14, 378 CE (a Wednesday). Thus we know that Paulus was writing the <i>Introduction</i> in 378 CE.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-53"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-53">53</a></sup> See Greenbaum 2008; Greenbaum 2009, Chapters 6 and 7; Greenbaum 2016: 356-377.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-54"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-54">54</a></sup> Instead of using the arc between the Lot of Fortune or Daimon and the planet in question, both Valens and Firmicus, in different iterations, use the arc between the Lots of Fortune and Daimon, projecting this arc either clockwise or counterclockwise from the Ascendant, to construct the Lots of Eros and Necessity. (Thus the two lots appear in mirror image from the Ascendant.) For further detail, see Greenbaum 2016: 360-367.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-55"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-55">55</a></sup> Greenbaum 2009: 227-232; Greenbaum 2016: 360-367.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-56"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-56">56</a></sup> Olympiodorus, <i>Commentary</i>, Ch. 21, Boer 1962: 42.6-7; Paulus, <i>Introduction</i>, Title of Ch. 23, Boer 1958: 47.15 and Scholion 48, Boer 1958: 118.24-119.7.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-57"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-57">57</a></sup> Dorotheus, <i>Carmen Astrologicum</i>, Scholium ad Heph. III 6, 11 (Pingree 1976: 433.14-434.1).</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-58"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-58">58</a></sup> Paulus, <i>Introduction</i>, ch. 23, Boer 1958: 49.17-50.16; Antiochus, <i>Thesaurus</i>, ch. 47, in <i>CCAG</i> I: 160.11-28. An example of the similarities. Paulus: “Eros signifies appetites and desires occurring by choice, and it becomes responsible for friendship and favor. Necessity signifies imprisonments, subordinations, battles and wars, and it makes enmities, hatreds, condemnations and all the other constraining circumstances which happen to humans as their lot at birth.” Antiochus: “Aphrodite’s Lot—the Lot of Eros—signifies appetites, desires, and things that come to be by choice, and it is indicative of friendship and favor. Hermes’ Lot—the Lot of Necessity—signifies imprisonments, wars, enmities, hatreds, condemnations and all the other constraining circumstances which are brought about by humans.” </p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-59"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-59">59</a></sup> For the dating of the papyrus, see Daniel 1991: x-xi: “At page 21, line 23 <span class="T12">χολουε</span> (or perhaps some words earlier) a second hand (h<span class="T36">2</span>) took over and wrote to the end of page 25; ... The first hand is characteristic of the middle of the fourth century AD; by itself the second hand might have been dated somewhat earlier.” Thus the likely date for the papyrus <span class="T11">in toto</span> is the middle of the 4<span class="T36">th</span> century CE. Whether this is the same book later associated with Paulus and the seven lots cannot be verified; even so, the fourth-century date post-dates the discussion of lots by Valens.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-60"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-60">60</a></sup> See Epiphanius, <i>On Weights and Measures</i>, 119 (Moutsoulas 1973); also <i>On Weights and Measures</i> as quoted in John of Damascus (Kotter 1973: 210-11).</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-61"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-61">61</a></sup> Gundel and Gundel 1966: 11, n. 1, cite the <span class="T22">Panaretos</span> as Hermetic. At 238 they say that one of Paulus’s sources is Hermes Trismegistus, and the <span class="T22">Panaretos</span>, but do not explicitly assign the <span class="T22">Panaretos</span> to Hermes: “Als seine Quellen nennt er [i.e. Paulus] Hermes Trismegistos, die <span class="T22">Panaretos</span>, Apollonarios und Apollonius...”. (Yet Paulus does not mention Hermes in association with lots; only the scholiast does this.) Scholars subsequently citing this work (or citing works that cite it) accept the Gundels’ account, causing a domino effect on later scholars using the same chain of citation, e.g.: Couliano 1984: 143, who cites the Gundels; Quispel 1992: 9 (= Quispel 2000: 155), who cites Couliano; and  DeConick 2005: 207 and n. 51, who cites Quispel.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-62"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-62">62</a></sup> This would account for the errors in some calculations, and as well the faulty grammar of the papyrus.</p>

<p class="footnote" id="footnote-commiii-63"><sup><a href="#footnote-reference-commiii-63">63</a></sup> Other astrologers who include their own birthcharts in their astrological teaching texts include Manetho the astrologer, Vettius Valens and Hephaestio of Thebes.</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>