<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>ISAW Papers 12 Apparatus</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="isaw-publications.css"/>

</head>
	
<body dir="ltr" style="max-width:8.5in;margin-top:1in; margin-bottom:0.5in; margin-left:1.25in; margin-right:1.25in; writing-mode:lr-tb; ">

<section>
<h1>Apparatus</h1>

<p class="textindent0">i.</p>
<p class="textindent0" style="margin-top:0em">7 <i>l</i>. ταπείνωμα | 9 <i>l.</i> πλάτει | 11-12 <i>l.</i> τοῦ διὰ μέϲων | 13 ⟦α⟧`έʹ overwritten, <i>l.</i> καταβαίνουϲα | 15 <i>l.</i> παρανατέλλει</p>

<p class="textindent0 margintop15em">ii.</p>
<p class="textindent0" style="margin-top:0em">3 <i>l.</i> οἰκῷ | 5 Ἑ̣: unidentifiable speck of ink | 7 <i>l.</i> ταπείνωμα | 9 <i>l.</i> πλάτει | 11-12 <i>l.</i> τοῦ διὰ μέϲων | 13 <i>l.</i> καταβαίνων | 14 <i>l.</i> βόρεια | 15 <i>l.</i> παρανατέλλει | 18 <i>l.</i> βορειότεροϲ</p>

<p class="textindent0 margintop15em">iii.</p>
<p class="textindent0" style="margin-top:0em">3 <i>l.</i> οἰκῷ | 4 <i>l.</i> μονομοιρίᾳ ἰδίᾳ | 7-8 <i>l.</i> ταπείνωμα | 9 <i>l.</i> πλάτει | 10 <i>l.</i> βορείου | 11   ̣: the bottom of a small loop, consistent with either alpha or beta, with no visible trace of an overbar | 12 <i>l.</i> τοῦ διὰ μέϲων | 13-14 <i>l.</i> καταβαίνων τὰ βόρεια | 15 <i>l.</i> παρανατέλλει | 16 <i>l.</i> ἀπλανὴϲ | 19 ⟦ων⟧`αϲ΄ crossed out and corr. above the line</p>

<p class="textindent0 margintop15em">iv.</p>
<p class="textindent0" style="margin-top:0em">3 ϊδιω | 4 <i>l.</i> μονομοιρίᾳ | 5 Ἡ̣[λ]ί̣ο̣υ̣: traces of tops of letters | 6 <i>l.</i> δωδεκατημόριον | 7 <i>l.</i> ταπείνωμα | 9 <i>l.</i> πλάτει | 12 <i>l.</i> τοῦ διὰ μέϲων | 13 καταβένω̅, <i>l.</i> καταβαίνων | 15 <i>l.</i> παρανατέλλει δὲ </p>

<p class="textindent0 margintop15em">v.</p>
<p class="textindent0" style="margin-top:0em">3 ϊδιω | 4 <i>l.</i> μονομοιρίᾳ | 5 <i>l.</i> τριγώνῳ | 7 <i>l</i>. ταπείνωμα | 9 <i>l.</i> πλάτει | 12 <i>l.</i> τοῦ διὰ μέϲων | 13 <i>l.</i> καταβαίνων | 15 <i>l.</i> παρανατέλλει</p>

<p class="textindent0 margintop15em">vi.</p>
<p class="textindent0" style="margin-top:0em">3 <i>l.</i> οἰκῷ | 4 <i>l.</i> μονομοιρίᾳ | 6 <i>l.</i> Ταύρῳ | 7 <i>l.</i> ἀρϲενικῷ | 9 <i>l.</i> πλάτει | 12 <i>l.</i> τοῦ διὰ μέϲων | 13 <i>l.</i> ἀναβαίνων | 14 <i>l.</i> ταπεινὸν | 15 <i>l.</i> παρανατέλλει | 16 <i>l.</i> βορειότεροϲ | 17 <i>l.</i> βορειοτάτου</p>

<p class="textindent0 margintop15em">vii.</p>
<p class="textindent0" style="margin-top:0em">4 <i>l. </i>οἰκῷ | 5 <i>l.</i> μονομοιρίᾳ | 8 <i>l.</i> Ὑδροχόῳ | <i>l.</i> ταπείνωμα | 11 <i>l. </i>οἰκῷ | 12 <i>l.</i> μονομοιρίᾳ | 13 <i>l.</i> τριγώνῳ | ☾</p>

<p class="textindent0 margintop15em">viii.</p>
<p class="textindent0" style="margin-top:0em">2</p>

<p class="textindent0 margintop15em">ix.</p>
<p class="textindent0" style="margin-top:0em">17 <i>l</i>. κίνημα</p>

<p class="textindent0 margintop15em">xiii.</p>
<p class="textindent0" style="margin-top:0em">17 <span style="letter-spacing:-0.111in">Μ</span><sup>ο</sup></p>

<p class="textindent0 margintop15em">xiv.</p>
<p class="textindent0" style="margin-top:0em">2-5, 7-13 <i>l</i>. οἴκῳ</p>

<p class="textindent0 margintop15em">xv.</p>
<p class="textindent0" style="margin-top:0em">17 λεπ/</p>

<p class="textindent0 margintop15em">xvi.</p>
<p class="textindent0" style="margin-top:0em">15, 17 <i>l</i>. οἴκῳ</p>

<p class="textindent0 margintop15em">xvii.</p>
<p class="textindent0" style="margin-top:0em">17 <i>l</i>. ἰδίῳ</p>

<p class="textindent0 margintop15em">xviii.</p>
<p class="textindent0" style="margin-top:0em">5 <i>l</i>. μονομοιρίᾳ | <i>l</i>. τριγώνῳ</p>

</section>

<section>
<h1>Notes</h1>

<p class="textindent0 margintop15em">1.<span> A few slight traces of writing survive immediately above the top ruling of cols. ii and iii. If this text belonged to the horoscope, it might have identified the native and stated the date and place of birth.</span></p>

<p class="textindent0 margintop15em">i.</p>
<p class="textindent0">2-7.<span> The identities of the heavenly bodies of cols. i and ii can be extrapolated from the sequence Jupiter, Mars, Venus, Mercury of cols. iii-vi which shows that one of the conventional orders of the heavenly bodies for Greek horoscopes (Neugebauer &amp; van Hoesen 1959, 164), ♄♃♂♀☿☉☾ or (clearly in this instance) ☉☾♄♃♂♀☿ was followed. The text of i 2-7 is restored on analogy with the top registers for the other heavenly bodies. The zodiacal sign Cancer is inferred from the preserved closing word, which must belong to the formula specifying which heavenly bodies have their exaltation and depression in the sign. For 26 as the number of degrees, see Commentary II; as shown there, the number of minutes would have been around 30.</span></p>

<p class="textindent0">9-14.<span> Restored on analogy with the middle registers for the other heavenly bodies, taking into account the known longitudes of the Moon and the ascending node.</span></p>

<p class="textindent0">15-19.<span> The formula is restored on analogy with the bottom registers for the other heavenly bodies. For a likely identification of the zodiacal star named in this section see the Commentary II.</span></p>

<p class="textindent0 margintop15em">ii.</p>

<p class="textindent0">2-8.<span> For the restorations of the longitude and <i>monomoiria</i> see Commentary I.</span></p>

<p class="textindent0">9-14.<span> The indication "descending the north," if not simply a mistake, implies that Saturn's latitude was given the wrong sign; see Commentary II.</span></p>

<p class="textindent0">15-20.<span> For the identity of this star (which is not the expected one) and restorations of the associated data see Commentary II. The traces of writing in line 19 are mere specks, too slight to determine which letters they belong to; the restoration of the line would be μοιρῶν ζ̅ λεπτῶν κ̅.</span></p>

<p class="textindent0 margintop15em">iii.</p>

<p class="textindent0">2-8.<span> See Commentary I for demonstration that the longitude 7° 40' is an isolated scribal error for 3° 40'. The <i>dodekatemorion</i> is restored assuming 3° 40'.</span></p>

<p class="textindent0">11.<span> The degrees of latitude could have been either 1 or 2 according to the surviving trace.</span></p>

<p class="textindent0">15-20.<span> For the identity of the star see Commentary II; the correct name would be "the one on <i>the tip of</i> the southern wing of the Maiden" (ἐπ᾿ ἄκραϲ misread here as ἑπόμενοϲ).</span></p>

<p class="textindent0 margintop15em">iv.</p>

<p class="textindent0">7.<span> The <i>dodekatemorion</i> is restored from the longitude.</span></p>

<p class="textindent0">13.<span> Here and in col. iv the indication of the planet's trend in latitude is not followed by the direction north or south; perhaps it was seen as redundant.</span></p>

<p class="textindent0">15-20.<span> For the identity of the star see Commentary II.</span></p>

<p class="textindent0 margintop15em">v.</p>

<p class="textindent0">15-20.<span> For the identity of the star see Commentary II.</span></p>

<p class="textindent0 margintop15em">vi.</p>

<p class="textindent0">7.<span> Such attributes of zodiacal signs appear only in this column, perhaps taking the place of the indications of exaltation and depression which are not applicable to Sagittarius.</span></p>

<p class="textindent0">14.<span> The indications "depressed, exalted" are unexpected here and unclear in meaning; perhaps their presence is somehow related to the absence of any exaltation or depression in Sagittarius.</span></p>

<p class="textindent0">15-20.<span> For the identity of the star see Commentary II; the correct name would be "the <i>second</i> one from the most northerly of those on the bow" (β̅, i.e. δεύτεροϲ, misread here as βορειότεροϲ). The star in question has magnitude 3 according to Ptolemy; it is not clear why the horoscope appears to give two numbers for the magnitude.</span></p>

<p class="textindent0 margintop15em">viii-xvii.</p>

<p class="textindent0">3-4.<span> The degrees and minutes of the Setting and Lower Midheaven would have been identical to those of the Ascendant and Midheaven respectively.</span></p>

<p class="textindent0">11.<span> For the restoration of the degrees see Commentary I.</span></p>

<p class="textindent0">15.<span> See Commentary II for the problem of the meaning of this line.</span></p>

<p class="textindent0 margintop15em">xviii.</p>

<p class="textindent0">2. Following the hour number, "of day" (ἡμέραϲ, likely abbreviated) is expected; the traces are difficult to make sense of, however.</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>