<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Bibliography</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="isaw-publications.css"/>

</head>
<body>

<section id="manuscripts">
<h1>Manuscripts</h1>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation"><i>Leiden B. P. G.</i> 78, ff. 142r-145r. <a href="https://socrates.leidenuniv.nl/R/-?func=dbin-jump-full&amp;object_id=2866440" class="Internet_20_link"><span class="Internet_20_link">https://socrates.leidenuniv.nl/R/-?func=dbin-jump-full&amp;object_id=2866440</span></a></span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation"><i>Laurentianus pluteus</i> 28,26, ff. 124v-127r. <a href="http://teca.bmlonline.it/TecaRicerca/index.jsp" class="Internet_20_link"><span class="Internet_20_link">http://teca.bmlonline.it/TecaRicerca/index.jsp</span></a> (search for "plut.28.26")</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation"><i>Laurentianus pluteus</i> 28,34, ff. 141v-143v <a href="http://teca.bmlonline.it/TecaRicerca/index.jsp" class="Internet_20_link"><span class="Internet_20_link">http://teca.bmlonline.it/TecaRicerca/index.jsp</span></a> (search for "plut.28.34")</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation"><i>Parisinus graecus 2425, ff. 216v-219v.</i> <a href="http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b107240960" class="Internet_20_link"><span class="Internet_20_link"><i>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b107240960</i></span></a></span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation"><i>Parisinus graecus 2506, f. 73.</i> <a href="http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10722216r?rk=21459;2" class="Internet_20_link"><span class="Internet_20_link"><i>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10722216r?rk=21459;2</i></span></a></span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation"><i>Vaticanus graecus</i> 1291, ff. 90v-94v. <a href="http://digi.vatlib.it/view/MSS_Vat.gr.1291" class="Internet_20_link"><span class="Internet_20_link">http://digi.vatlib.it/view/MSS_Vat.gr.1291</span></a></span></p>

</section>

<section id="bibliography">
<h1>Bibliography</h1>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Alcyone Ephemeris Calculator. <a href="http://www.alcyone.de/alcyone_ephemeris.html" class="Internet_20_link"><span class="Internet_20_link">http://www.alcyone.de/alcyone_ephemeris.html</span></a></span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Baccani, Donata. 1992. <i>Oroscopi greci: documentazione papirologica</i>. Ricerca papirologica 1. Messina: Sicania.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Bezza, Giuseppe. 2007. “The Development of an Astrological Term – from Greek <i>hairesis</i> to Arabic <i>ḥayyiz</i>.” <i>Culture and Cosmos</i> 11. 1 and 2: 229-260.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Boer, Emilie, ed. 1958. <i>Paulus Alexandrinus. Elementa Apotelesmatica</i>. Leipzig: B. G. Teubner.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Boer, Emilie, ed. 1962. <i>Olympiodorus. Heliodori, ut dicitur, in Paulum Alexandrinum Commentarium</i>. Leipzig: B. G. Teubner.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Cary, Earnest, trans. 1914-1927. <i>Dio Cassius. Roman History</i>. 9 vols. Loeb Classical Library. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation"><i>CCAG = Catalogus Codicum Astrologorum Graecorum</i>. 1898-1953. Franz Cumont et al., eds. 12 vols. Brussels: Henri Lamertin.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation"><i>CIL</i> = <i>Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum</i>. 1883. Theodor Mommsen, ed. Vol. IX. Berlin: Georg Reimer. http://cil.bbaw.de/cil_en/dateien/cil_baende.html</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Couliano, Ioan P. 1984. <i>Expériences de l'extase. Extase, ascension et récit visionnaire de l'Hellénisme au Moyen Âge</i>. Paris: Payot, 1984.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Daniel, Robert W., ed. 1991. <i>Two Greek Magical Papyri in the National Museum of Antiquities in Leiden. A Photographic Edition of J 384 and J 395 (= PGM XII and XIII)</i>, Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">DeConick, April. 2005. <i>Recovering the Original Gospel of Thomas: A History of the Gospel and its Growth</i><span class="T5">.</span> <span class="T5">London/New York: T &amp; T Clark.</span></span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">de Jong, Teije, and Klaas A. Worp. 1995. “A Greek Horoscope from 373 A.D.” <i>Zeitschrift für Papyrologie und Epigraphik</i> 106: 235-240.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation"> class="P4">Denningmann, Susanne. 2005. <i>Die astrologische Lehre der Doryphorie: Eine soziomorphe Metapher in der antiken Planetenastrologie</i>. Beiträge zur Altertumskunde 214. Munich/Leipzig: K. G. Saur.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Denningmann, Susanne. 2007. “The Ambiguous Terms ἑῴα and ἑσπερία ἀνατολή, and ἑῴα and ἑσπερία δύσις.” <i>Culture and Cosmos</i> 11.1 and 2: 189-210.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Divjak, Johannes and Wolfgang Wischmeyer, eds. 2014. <i>Das Kalenderhandbuch von 354. Der Chronograph des Filocalus</i>. 2 vols. Vienna: Verlag Holzhausen GmbH.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Feraboli, Simonetta, ed. 1994. <i>Hermetis Trismegisti: De triginta sex decanis</i>. Hermes Latinus IV/1 (Corpus Christianorum). Turnhout, Belgium: Brepols.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation"> class="P4">Frommhold, Katrin. 2004. <i>Die Bedeutung und Berechnung der Empfängnis in der Astrologie der Antike</i>. Vol. 38, Orbis antiquus 38. Münster: Aschendorff.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Graßhoff, Gerd. 1990. <i>The History of Ptolemy’s Star Catalogue</i>. Studies in the History of Mathematics and Physical Sciences 14. New York: Springer-Verlag.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Greenbaum, Dorian Gieseler. 2007. “Calculating the Lots of Fortune and Daemon in Hellenistic Astrology.” <i>Culture and Cosmos</i> 11.1 and 2: 163-187.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Greenbaum, Dorian Gieseler. 2008. “The Lots of Fortune and Daemon in Extant Charts from Antiquity (First Century BCE to Seventh Century CE).” <i>MHNH</i> 8: 173-190.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Greenbaum, Dorian Gieseler. 2009. <i>The Daimon in Hellenistic Astrology: Origins and Influence</i>. Ph.D. dissertation, Warburg Institute, University of London.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Greenbaum, Dorian Gieseler. 2016. <i>The Daimon in Hellenistic Astrology: Origins and Influence</i>. Ancient Magic and Divination 11. Leiden/Boston: Brill.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Greenbaum, Dorian Gieseler and Micah T. Ross. 2010. “The Role of Egypt in the Development of the Horoscope.” In <i>Egypt in Transition: Social and Religious Development of Egypt in the First Millennium BCE</i>, eds. Ladislav Bareš, Filip Coppens and Kveta Smolarikova, 146-182. Prague: Faculty of Arts, Charles University in Prague.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Gundel, Wilhelm and Hans Georg Gundel. 1966. <i>Astrologumena. Die astrologische Literatur in der Antike und ihre Geschichte</i>. Wiesbaden: Steiner.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Hand, Robert. 2007. “Signs as Houses (Places) in Ancient Astrology.” <i>Culture and Cosmos</i> 11.1 and 2: 135-162.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Heiberg, J. L., ed. 1898. <i>Claudii Ptolemaei Opera Quae Exstant Omnia.</i> Vol. 1. <i>Syntaxis Mathematica</i> (2 parts). Leipzig: B. G. Teubner.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Heilen, Stephan. 2004. “Astrological Remarks on the New Horoscopes from Kellis.” <i>Zeitschrift für Papyrologie und Epigraphik</i> 146 (2004): 131-136.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Heilen, Stephan. 2010. “Ptolemy's Doctrine of the Terms and Its Reception.” In <i>Ptolemy in Perspective: Use and Criticism of his Work from Antiquity to the Nineteenth Century</i>, ed. Alexander Jones, 45-93. Archimedes 23. Dordrecht/Heidelberg/London/New York: Springer Science and Business Media, 2010.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Heilen, Stephan. 2015. <i>Hadriani genitura. Die astrologischen Fragmente des Antigonos von Nikaia. Edition, Übersetzung und Kommentar</i>. 2 vols. Texte und Kommentare 43. Berlin: De Gruyter.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Holden, James Herschel, trans. 2009. <i>Rhetorius the Egyptian. Astrological Compendium containing His Explanation and Narration of The Whole Art of Astrology</i>. Tempe AZ: American Federation of Astrologers.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology. Horizons Ephemeris. <a href="http://ssd.jpl.nasa.gov/horizons.cgi" class="Internet_20_link"><span class="Internet_20_link">http://ssd.jpl.nasa.gov/horizons.cgi</span></a></span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Jones, Alexander. 1987. An Eleventh-Century Manual of Arabo-Byzantine Astronomy. Corpus des astronomes byzantins 3. Amsterdam: J. C. Gieben.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Jones, Alexander. 2010. “Ancient Rejection and Adoption of Ptolemy’s Frame of Reference for Longitudes.” In <i>Ptolemy in Perspective: Use and Criticism of his Work from Antiquity to the Nineteenth Century</i>, ed. Alexander Jones, 11-44. Archimedes 23. Dordrecht/Heidelberg/London/New York: Springer Science and Business Media.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Kotter, P. B., ed. 1973. <i>Epiphanius. “</i>De mensuris et ponderibus (ap. Joannem Damascenum) (excerpta Graecum 8)<i>.”</i>  In <i>Die Schriften des Johannes von Damaskos</i>. Berlin: De Gruyter.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Monat, P., ed. and trans. 1992-1997. <i>Julius Firmicus Maternus. Mathesis</i>. 3 vols. Collection des universités de France. Paris: Les Belles Lettres.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Moutsoulas, E. 1973. “Τὸ ‘Περὶ μέτρων καὶ σταθμῶν’ ἔργον Ἐπιφανίου τοῦ Σαλαμῖνος.” <i>Θεολογία</i> 44: 157-200.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Neugebauer, Otto. 1943. “Demotic Horoscopes.” <i>Journal of the American Oriental Society</i> 63.2: 115-127.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Neugebauer, Otto. 1975. <i>A History of Ancient Mathematical Astronomy</i>. 3 vols. Berlin/Heidelberg/New York: Springer-Verlag.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Neugebauer, Otto and H. B. Van Hoesen. 1959. <i>Greek Horoscopes</i>. Philadelphia: The American Philosophical Society.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Peters, Christian H. F. and Edward B. Knobel. 1915. <i>Ptolemy’s Catalogue of Stars: A Revision of the Almagest</i>. Washington: The Carnegie Institution.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Pingree, David, ed. 1968. <i>Abū Ma‘shar. De revolutionibus nativitatum</i>. Leipzig: B. G. Teubner.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Pingree, David. 1973. “The Horoscope of Constantine VII Porphyrogenitus.” <i>Dumbarton Oaks Papers</i> 27: 217-231.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Pingree, David, ed. 1976. <i>Dorotheus of Sidon. Carmen Astrologicum</i>. Leipzig: B. G. Teubner.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Pingree, David, ed. 1986. <i>Vettius Valens. Anthologiarum libri novem</i>. Leipzig: B.G. Teubner.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Quispel, Gilles. 1992. “Hermes Trismegistus and the Origins of Gnosticism.” <i>Vigiliae Christianae</i> 46.1: 1-19.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Quispel, Gilles. 2000. “Hermes Trismegistus and the Origins of Gnosticism.” (Reprint of Quispel 1992.). In <i>From Poimandres to Jacob Böhme: Gnosis, Hermetism and the Christian Tradition</i>, eds. R. van den Broek and C. van Heertum. Pimander 4. Amsterdam: Biblioteca Philosophica Hermetica.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Rochberg-Halton, Francesca. 1988. “Elements of the Babylonian Contribution to Hellenistic Astrology.” <i>Journal of the American Oriental Society</i> 108, no. 1: 51-62.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Rochberg, Francesca. 2010. <i>In the Path of the Moon: Babylonian Celestial Divination and its Legacy</i>. Studies in Ancient Magic and Divination 6. Leiden/Boston: Brill.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Ross, Micah T. 2006. <i>Horoscopic Ostraca from Medînet Mâdi</i>. Ph.D. Dissertation, Brown University.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Ross, Micah. 2011. “A Provisional Conclusion to the Horoscopic Ostraca from Medînet Mâdi”. <i>Egitto e Vicino Oriente</i> 34: 47-80.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Swerdlow, Noel M. 2005. “Ptolemy’s Theories of the Latitude of the Planets in the Almagest, Handy Tables, and Planetary Hypotheses,” In <i>Wrong for the Right Reasons</i><span class="T7">, eds. J. Z. Buchwald and A. Franklin, 41-71. Archimedes 11. Berlin</span> [etc.]: Springer.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Tihon, Anne and Raymond Mercier. 2011. <i>Les «Tables Faciles» de Ptolemée: 1.a. Tables A1-A2. Introduction, édition critique</i>; <i>Ptolemy’s Handy Tables: 1b. Tables A1-A2. Transcription and Commentary</i>. Publications de l’Institut Orientaliste de Louvain 59a-b. Louvain-la-Neuve: Université Catholique de Louvain/Peeters.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Toomer, Gerald J., ed. 1976. <i>Diocles, On Burning Mirrors. The Arabic Translation of the Lost Greek Original</i>. Sources in the History of Mathematics and Physical Sciences 1. Berlin/Heidelberg/New York: <span class="T8">Springer-Verlag.</span></span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Toomer, Gerald J., ed. 1984. <i>Ptolemy’s Almagest</i>. Duckworth Classical, Medieval and Renaissance Editions. London: Duckworth. Reprinted 1998, with foreword by Owen Gingerich. Princeton:Princeton University Press.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">van Gent, Robert. <i>Almagest Ephemeris Calculator</i>. <a href="http://www.staff.science.uu.nl/~gent0113/astro/almagestephemeris_main.htm">http://www.staff.science.uu.nl/~gent0113/astro/almagestephemeris_main.htm</a></span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Warnon, Jean. 1967. “Le commentaire attribué à Héliodore sur les εἰσαγωγικά de Paul d'Alexandrie.” Travaux de la Faculté de Philosophie et Lettres de l’Université Catholique de Louvain 2. Section de Philologie classique 1. <i>Recherches de philologie et de linguistique</i>: 197-217.</span></p>

<p id="reference-" class="work-cited" rel="dcterms:references" typeof="dcterms:BibliographicResource"><span property="dcterms:bibliographicCitation">Westerink, L. G. 1971. “Ein astrologisches Kolleg aus dem Jahre 564.” <i>Byzantinische Zeitschrift</i>, 64: 6-21</span></p>
</section>

</body>
</html>